The Project Gutenberg eBook of Wood Wanderings, by Winthrop Packard

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Wood Wanderings

Author: Winthrop Packard

Illustrator: Charles Copeland

Release Date: August 14, 2021 [eBook #66059]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Steve Mattern, Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was
             produced from images made available by the HathiTrust Digital
             Library.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WOOD WANDERINGS ***




                            WOOD WANDERINGS

                     THE WORKS OF WINTHROP PACKARD


                            WOODLAND PATHS
                             WILD PASTURES
                            WOOD WANDERINGS
                             WILDWOOD WAYS

                _Each illustrated by Charles Copeland_

 12mo. Ornamental cloth, gilt top, each volume $1.20 _net_, postage 8
                                 cents


The four volumes together constitute “The New England Year,” dealing, in
the order given, with the four seasons. The set, boxed, $4.80; _carriage
                       extra_. Sold separately.


                      SMALL, MAYNARD AND COMPANY
                       PUBLISHERS        BOSTON

[Illustration: You may see a slender doe pirouette like a ballet-dancing
wood nymph

[_Page 38_]
]




                            WOOD WANDERINGS

                                  BY
                           WINTHROP PACKARD

                            ILLUSTRATED BY
                           CHARLES COPELAND

                            [Illustration]


                                BOSTON
                      SMALL, MAYNARD AND COMPANY
                              PUBLISHERS




                            COPYRIGHT, 1910

                     BY SMALL, MAYNARD AND COMPANY
                            (INCORPORATED)

                     _Entered at Stationers’ Hall_


                THE UNIVERSITY PRESS, CAMBRIDGE, U.S.A.


The author wishes to express his thanks to the “Boston Transcript” for
   permission to reprint in this volume matter which was originally
                      contributed to its columns.




CONTENTS


                                                                    PAGE

FAIRY FRUIT                                                            1

THE LAND OF SPRUCE                                                    21

BIRDS OF THE NOR’EASTER                                               43

THE SQUIRREL HARVEST                                                  65

AMONG AUTUMN LEAVES                                                   85

THE DAY THAT SUMMER CAME BACK                                        107

WHEN AUTUMN PASSES                                                   129

NOVEMBER WOODS                                                       149

WINTER BIRDS’-NESTING                                                171

SOME CROWS I HAVE KNOWN                                              193

INDEX                                                                217




ILLUSTRATIONS


You may see a slender doe pirouette like a ballet-dancing
wood nymph                                                 _Frontispiece_

                                                           OPPOSITE PAGE

The woodchuck is the very mark and origin of the
paunchy gnome                                                          8

Seems to think himself secure there                                   36

The red squirrel gets the burs after the fashion of
the real sport                                                        68

He does not have to look for his food                                160

A field mouse had appropriated this nest for an
autumn storehouse                                                    182

Across the angry crimson of the west flitted silhouetted
black wings                                                          198




FAIRY FRUIT


To-day the September west winds have begun the fall house-cleaning by
sweeping the tops of the pine woods. All the morning the little brown
scales which nestle close to the base of each pine leaf as it grows,
protecting it from the withering force of the midsummer sun, have been
soaring and spinning in high glee, curiously lighting up with brown
glimmers the solemn sanctuaries beneath.

It is the first prophecy of winter under the sheltering boughs where
still lingers the midsummer warmth. The chickadees, going their forenoon
rounds, scold about it in a brisk fashion that is in tune with the
briskness of the wind itself. In the languor of the south wind the
chickadee has a little lazy song which he sings often, “Sleepee,
sleepee,” a tuneful little ditty that makes you want to stretch out on
the brown carpet with a mound of green moss for a pillow and let the
resinous odors lull you to sleep. I always feel that the bird himself
murmurs it with one eye closed and himself in danger of falling off the
perch in slumber.

None of that song to-day. It’s “chick-chickachick, chick-a-chicadee dee
dee,” with a snap in it like the crack of a whip. Yet the flock soon
passes on, and in the dreamy warmth of the grove you know little of the
vivid touch in the wind. Only enough of it comes through to set the
little brown pine motes to whirling merrily as they fall, vanishing from
sight like flitting elves as they touch the brown carpet below.

There was another elf-like transformation, an appearing and a
disappearing, in the woods this morning. That was a _Pyrameis atalanta_
that kept vanishing into the trunk of a big pitch pine. This, the red
admiral, own cousin to the familiar _Pyrameis carduii_, the painted
lady, is a butterfly whose movements are as snappy as those of the west
wind on these house-cleaning days. Rich red, white and black are the
colors on the upper side of its wings, but when these are closed there
is exposed only the under side, which makes the creature so exactly like
a rough chip of the pitch-pine bark that when he lights on the trunk the
vanishing is complete. Out of nothing he sprang, a vivid flash of
darting red and white flipping before your eyes, then he darted up to
the pine trunk that seemed to open and let him go in, so completely did
he transform his bright colors into a bit of brown bark.

The more I see of woodland glades and sun-dappled depths and the
creatures that inhabit them the less I am inclined to smile at the elder
races of the world that peopled them with fairies, sprites, and goblins.
Why should they not believe in these things? It is hard sometimes for us
to forego all lingering remnants of faith in such inhabitants of field
and wood.

This morning on my way to the grove I seemed to meet with more than the
usual number of woodchucks, though you would hardly call it meeting, for
our paths never crossed. But in three different parts of the big
mowing-field a woodchuck bobbed out of nowhere in particular. No doubt
he was feeding on the clover of the farmer’s aftermath, but I saw no
more of that than the cropped herbage after the woodchuck was gone. My
first sight each time was when the animal began to roll in a straight
line across the field. I say roll, for woodchucks at this time of year
are so fat that they do not seem to run, but undulate over the grass as
does the deep sea wave over the shallows.

I never can help chasing them, though I know well what is about to
happen. Nor do I expect to catch one, for, fat as they are, they move
with surprising rapidity. Even if I happen to know where his hole is by
the pile of dirt at the door and rush between him and it, I am no nearer
getting my game. I always fancy that the fat shoulders of the woodchuck
jiggle with laughter and his little pig eyes twinkle, for that is just
what he expects and is prepared for. He keeps right on in his straight
line, then psst! he vanishes. You don’t see him dive or turn or hide. He
just goes out of sight. You may poke about in the grass for a long time
before you find the secret entrance by which he has returned to his
burrow. Sometimes he has two of them. They are dug from within outward
and no tell-tale trace of dirt is left to mark their location. This has
all been carried down with infinite pains, then up, and left at the
public door, where all may see it. The woodchuck is the very mark and
origin of the paunchy gnome, which is said to guard buried treasures,
and which bobs out of the earth, frightens Hob from his intended mining,
then bobs back into the earth to guard the gold.

So you have but to go into the pine grove to-day with inquiring eye and

[Illustration: The woodchuck is the very mark and origin of the paunchy
gnome]

acquiescent mind and all the beautiful old superstitions that always
plead to be taken into the belief will come trooping along, to your
supreme delectation. Well might the great and good Wordsworth say, he
who knew the open wold and the bosky dell as few of us are privileged to
know them, and wrote about them as none of us can:

              “Great God! I’d rather be
      A Pagan suckled in a creed outworn,
    So might I, standing on this pleasant lea,
      Have glimpses that would make me less forlorn;
    Have sight of Proteus rising from the sea,
      Or hear old Triton blow his wreathed horn.”

Here in the pine grove is the riding-school of sylphs
innumerable,--those fragile fairies who float in slender grace on the
passing breeze. Their launching stands are the flat-topped receptacles
of the blooms of _Erechthites hieracifolium_, the coarse and homely
fireweed. All summer it has stood in the open spaces of the wood with
its tall stalks bearing blossoms that look like green druggists’
pestles, with no beauty of petal or sepal to entice, no fragrance to
call the wandering bee. Indeed, these surly blooms seem like buds that
were too cross to open. Now it is different. The green bonds of guardian
bracts are reflexed, and you may now see that this unattractive flower
has held close pressed within its homely heart companies of sylphs.

White and slender and soft, they stand until the right wind comes along,
then they spring fearlessly to his invisible shoulders and are borne
whither they list. Not mortal things are these thistledown fairies that
are so transparent white that you may look through them as they float by
and see the sun. If it pleases them to touch your hand or your cheek as
they pass, you may note an ethereality of sensation which is thought
rather than feeling, so light it is.

The _Epilobium angustifolium_, sometimes called willow herb, is another
fireweed, as beautiful of bloom as _Erechthites_ is homely. Like this,
it grows in waste places in the wood, flaunting its long raceme of
showy, pink-purple flowers all summer. Like the _Erechthites_, too, when
September has tamed its exuberance, it is more beautiful still as the
abode of white sylphs which cling in whorls to its stem. Yet, mark you
the difference. The sylphs, reared by the dour and homely fireweed,
stand erect and prim in close communion as stately and correct and
dignified as sylphs may be. Those born of the flaunting _Epilobium_
cling to it in graceful, almost voluptuous abandon, assuming such poses
as nymphs might in wooing a satyr. Equally beautiful, the first are like
prim New England schoolmarms diaphanously gowned for a Greek play; the
second suggest artists’ models frolicking in the woodland before being
called to pose.

Along with these two fireweeds, breeders of sylphs, in my pine wood
grows the pokeweed, a villainous name for a wonderfully vigorous and
beautiful plant. Just now its close-set racemes of purple-black berries
are ripening, their color a vivid contrast with the smooth rich green of
its ovate-oblong leaves and the wine color of its stems. It is really a
royal plant, and so great is its vigor that its dark berries threaten to
burst their skins and scatter their rich crimson lifeblood. If you will
look closely at the berries you will see that the fairies have stitched
them neatly across the top to prevent this. The marks of the needle
show, and the tiny puckering made by drawing the thread very tight.

It is so workmanlike a performance that I suspect the _leprachauns_, who
are shoemakers, of having been called in to do it,--called in, for the
_leprachauns_, without doubt, have all they can do conveniently, making
and mending the fairy shoon. No doubt the brownies, who are domestic
fairies and who would be keeping watch of the woodland fruits anent the
preserving season, had them attend to this, lest the preserving be a
failure. The poke berries look so rich and luscious that I have tried
them; but I cannot say that I like the flavor, which is rich indeed, but
peculiar. But then, I remember my first olive. They don’t taste half so
bad as that did, and compared with pickled limes, which school-girls
eat with avidity, they are nectar and ambrosia in one package.

All the under-pine world is spread just now with beautiful berries, for
which neither we nor the birds seem to have a taste. There are the
partridge berries, which, by the way, I have never seen a partridge eat,
nor have I found them in the crops of partridges, which I have been mean
enough to shoot. Yet these are, to my mind, the most edible of all,
though they are insipidly sweet, and their flavor is so finely pleasant
that it is not for the coarse palate of most mortals. Their vines carpet
the wood in places, and the soft, pure red of the berries would catch
the eye of bird or beast from afar. These stay ripe and sound all
winter, and you may see their red shining softly among the evergreen
leaves when the bare ground responds, dull and sleepy still, to the
resurrection trump of spring. They have not been gobbled whole,
therefore the larger animals and birds of the wood do not care for them;
but in the spring you will often find them with a tiny bite taken out of
one side. This can have been done by no other than the fairy urchins,
too young to eat fruit with safety, and forbidden by their mothers, they
yet slip out and take a bite before they can be hindered.

Equally beautiful and conspicuous, and equally insipid to the human
taste, are the great blue berries of the _Clintonia borealis_, which
grows sparingly under the pines hereabouts. These are as large as the
end of your finger, and a wonderful clear shade of prussian blue. If you
know the leaf of the lady’s slipper,--the moccasin-flowered orchid which
is so common in June under all pines,--you might, thinking of the leaf
only, call this the fruit of the lady’s slipper, where, as sometimes
happens, but one berry grows on a stem. Yet if you look further you will
not long labor under the mistake, for you will find many stalks with
several berries, whereas the single blossom of the _Cypripedium acaule_
could leave behind it but one. The fruit of the lady’s slipper is at
this time of the year a dry brown pod, whence all the little dry seeds
have long ago dropped; indeed, it is only occasionally that you will
find the pod left so long.

I do not know but birds eat the beautiful fruit of the _Clintonia_,
though I have never seen them do it, and I fancy it is too insipid to
creatures that love wild blackberries, raspberries, and cherries. Yet,
as in the case of the partridge berries, I have often seen the fruit
with a tiny mouthful taken out of it as it stands on the stalk. This is
a bigger mouthful than the marks left in the partridge berries, so I
know that it is not fairy urchins which have done it, even if I thought
they could climb these tall, slippery stalks. I have a fancy that Queen
Mab herself, who, as you very well know, is the fairy midwife as well as
queen, flitting home in the dusk of morning from motherly service, has
stopped for a brief refreshment on the _Clintonia_ stalk. I even have a
notion that I can see in the bitten berries the prints of the wee pearls
that are her teeth.

Every little starry bloom of the _Smilacina bifolia_, which vies with
the _Mitchella_ in carpeting the pine wood, leaves behind it a lovely
tiny berry that is like a pinhead currant. These, now, are in little
groups at the top of the withering stalks. Fairy currants I have heard
them called, and I think the name a good one, for they are red and juicy
like currants and taste not unlike them, though, like all these fruits,
the flavoring is more insipid. They are a lovelier berry before ripening
than after, for when young they are a slender sage green, through which
the red shows more and more in dappling spots as they ripen, making them
a most beautiful warm gray.

I am quite sure that the fairies make jam of these, stowing it away in
wild-cherry stone jars, built for them by the stone-mason wood mice, who
are very busy with the wild-cherry stones about this time. They drill a
little round hole in each and extract the kernel, then put the stones
away in their storehouses for sale to the fairies. I have often found
these storehouses with the stones put away in them, but have never been
fortunate enough to find the fairy larder with the jam in the jars.

I often wonder what the fairies think of the fruit of the nodding
_trillium_, which you will find in the wood now with the others. I fancy
they look upon it with wonder and amazement as a miracle of agriculture,
just as we, about this time, wonder at the vast pumpkin exhibited at the
county fair. It is sometimes almost an inch in diameter, roundish, with
six angles or flutings on it, and a very vivid crimson in color.

To the fairies they must seem to grow, like cocoanuts, on palm trees,
for the _trillium’s_ erect stem, bearing its spreading palm-like leaves
only at the top, is a foot or so high. I imagine they gather these as
they fall with great glee, and stow them away for winter use in making
fairy pumpkin pies. Often in autumn, along woodland paths in the night,
I have seen a faint glow where I was about to set my foot. Always I step
aside carefully, for I have been told that this soft, greenish light
comes from glowworms.

Yet it is more than likely that sometimes the fairy urchins have been
allowed to make jack-o’-lanterns from the smaller of these _trillium_
pumpkins, and this faint glow is the fairy candle within these. After
stepping aside you should bend your head and listen. If you hear faint,
tinkling laughter, inexpressibly sweet and fine, it is the urchins out
with their jack-o’-lanterns, and laughing in glee that they have
succeeded in scaring someone.




THE LAND OF SPRUCE


The seamed and wrinkled face of Katahdin, brown and weather-beaten,
looks over twenty-five miles of unbroken forest eastward to “Number One”
plantation, through which runs the fine gray line of the Patten road.
Southward for miles upon miles, northward for miles upon other miles it
stretches, taut and straight as a bowstring, narrow as a creed, and as
inexorable.

On either side of it, here and there, the hand of man has hewn an open
space for a farm. Yet you may stand on the summit of the ridge at Number
One and look eastward for forty miles and see only the unbroken green of
the forest, with the black lances of the firs and spruce stabbing the
sky. The thin gray road seems about to be crushed and wiped off the
world by these green eastern and western millstones which press upon it.
They smooth off the boundaries of the farm spaces, roll over fences, and
crush them into the black earth beneath. The lone farmer fights
valiantly against this, but sooner or later old age gets him, or a fire
burns his buildings; then the forest rolls majestically on and over him.

That is what it has done up on Number One. On the long white line of the
Patten road a single house and farm buildings remain. These mark General
Winfield Scott’s farthest north during the Aroostook war, three-quarters
of a century ago, when Maine and New Brunswick quarreled over boundary
lines. I can but fancy that the general, who had traveled that long,
thin line of straight road, from Bangor to Lincoln, to Mattawamkeag,
and thence to Number One, up hill and down dale, with never a curve to
rest the eye or avoid a hill, sighed thankfully when he learned that he
need not reach his journey’s end.

Along this road in his day, and for fifty years after, trailed the tote
teams laden with goods for northern Aroostook, returning weighted with
the products of the forest. Four and six-horse teams they were, and they
traveled sometimes a dozen in a procession, doubling hitches at some
steep pitch and hauling the wagons over, one by one. The road was a busy
one then, and the old taverns strung along at intervals of a dozen miles
or so rang with life. To-day those that remain are bleak and deserted,
and only a few remain. The others have been burned at one time or
another.

Along this road came Thoreau on his trip into the Maine woods, and you
may yet see the doorstone on which he stood and looked across to the
store across the street, which was so diminutive that the stout
proprietor, as he said, had to come out to let a customer in. Thoreau
might well have been surprised could he have known the volume of
business done in this diminutive store, which was really only the office
of the big barn behind, which held the goods in bulk. No wonder a
proprietor waxes fat when people hitch up and drive fifteen or twenty
miles to trade at his store, the only one within that distance.

To-day of South Moluncus not much more than the thresholds remains, the
whole village having been wiped out by fire. But the glory of the place
had departed long since. The railroad which brings civilization and
prosperity to some places takes it away from others; and Mattawamkeag
and Kingman thrive, while South Moluncus and other once busy little
centers in the virgin forest along the old Patten road are like the
cities of old Greece, but memories and ash heaps. The porcupine noses
unmolested in many a cellar along the narrow way, the deer browse
undisturbed on the apple trees, and over the once prosperous farms
passes the resistless, majestic march of the forest.

It cannot subdue that thin gray line of road, because the hand of man is
set to the keeping of it open; but it crowds to the wheelruts, and in
places where the pitch is steep and later builders have deviated from
the straight line and made a curve so that the hill might be climbed
more easily, it has swooped upon this untraveled bit and made forest of
it again with amazing celerity.

That is the one astounding thing in this whole region of northern
Maine,--the regenerative power of the forest. What could stand before
the surgent growth of its young trees? Men with axes have been hacking
at the giants of the wood up here for two centuries and more. The
goliaths have been laid low indeed, yet for one tree that stood on a
given space along the hillsides and in the valleys of Number One a
century ago five stand to-day.

They are giants no more, it is true, but they are splendid trees; and
just as the Liliputians might prevail where Gulliver was bound, so these
trees hold their own against man and even press in on his clearings and
wipe them out. There must be many more lumbermen with axes along the
Macwahoc, the Moluncus, and the Mattawamkeag before this beautiful
region will fail of its forest.

Over on the ridge, some miles to the westward of the Macwahoc-Kingman
road, stands a sole survivor of the old-time pumpkin pines. Forty and
fifty feet from the earth toward its limbs the birches and beeches lift
whispering leaves. Timber and cat-spruce and resinous fir spire higher
yet and fling incense toward him. Sixty and seventy feet they reach,
growing tenuous to the tip of nothingness, yet the stately column of his
trunk soars half a hundred feet beyond their tops, lonely and
unapproachable.

It was to forests of such trees as these that our great-grandfathers
brought their axes,--a forest that we unlucky moderns may see here in
our dreams only. We are fortunate in having the stumps left, for they
still stand along the Moluncus in much the same form that they stood
when the lumberman’s axe was yet pitchy with their chips. The roots are
still sound wood, and it may be another half-century before they decay
and add to the richness of the dense forest mold about them.

The stumps, five or six feet in diameter, and often as high as your
head, showing in what depth of snow our ancestors worked at their
logging, hold their shape in many instances. Around the base is a
circular ring of dark rich mold which was once the bark on the stump.
This has in every case fallen off and crumbled to humus, leaving the
heart-wood exposed. Mosses gray and green cling to this and cover it,
and because it retains its shape you might almost think it sound, but a
kick or a stab with your walking-stick will prove the opposite. It is
but punk, standing in the breathless, windless silence of the wood, mute
monument to a glory that is departed, waiting itself to pass on at a
touch.

What the glory and solemnity of the Maine forest must have been when
these giants were the columns to the temple of the woods we can but
dream. In the dense shade of their dark, interlocking boughs no
deciduous growth could thrive, and their own lower branches died for
lack of sunlight and passed in time, leaving behind no scars to mar the
splendid columns that rose fifty or sixty feet clear without knob or
limb.

Out of these lofty, silent spaces must have stepped the tall gods of the
red men, nor can one imagine the Indians themselves traversing them in
other than silent reverence. Nor yet can we of a stronger race stand
among their moss-grown stumps to-day without feeling the worshipful awe
of the forest strong upon us. The gods are gone indeed, but the demigods
remain. The spruces and firs, foster children of the great pines, stand
close-set upon the ground that they once occupied and rear again the
temple toward heaven in pinnacles and spires where once were
darkly-vaulted domes.

You may worship here still, as I feel that you might have worshiped
under the great pines, and I can but feel, too, that among the firs the
wood gods are nearer and more gently kind than they may have been among
the elder trees. The giant on the ridge, looming so high in cold
reserve, seems too lonely and far away for human companionship. The
spruces and firs are your friends, while yet the deep wood which they
make loses no whit of its solemn nobility.

The timber-spruce, as it is commonly called, seems to drop its lower
limbs a little more readily than its darker boughed brother, which goes
by the name of cat-spruce among the local lumbermen, to thus prepare
itself for the lumberman’s axe as yielding a timber in which at a given
age are fewer knots. White and black spruce, the botanists call them,
they and the lumbermen definitely distinguishing between the two by
minute differences, which to the new-comer in the big wood are not so
easily appreciable.

You may know the fir more readily. It seems to me a tree of a finer,
sweeter soul than any other evergreen. George Kimball, the novelist, who
wrote “Piney Home” about the people who dwell among the quaint farms and
silent stretches of interminable forests along the Moluncus and
Macwahoc, puts it pithily and prettily when he says: “The spruces wear
their hair pompadour; the firs part theirs in the middle.”

The fir, indeed, is a Quaker lady among evergreen trees, with her hair
so smoothly parted, her dark, unassuming, yet beautiful garb, and that
soothing, alluring, healing fragrance which floats ever about her like
an atmosphere of sincerity and loveliness. It seems as if all the wounds
of all the other denizens of the wood might be brought to her to heal,
so loving is her presence, so benign the soothing influence that floats
from her amber tears.

The sap of all trees has something of goodness and delight in it. The
maples bear sugar that is more than sweetness; it has in it some Attic
salt that makes the imagination smack its lips. The brew of the birch is
more than beer; it is the embodiment of a flavor that bears dreams of
rosy mornings on woody ridges that look down on the golden glory of the
primeval world. So the faint fragrance of the fir floats like a divine
presence from a loving heart that would fain clasp to itself the wounded
and stricken of the world and dress their wounds and make them whole
again. No wonder custom has adopted the fir for the Christmas tree.
There is no tree so fit to bear loving gifts to all the world.

The spruce partridge, as he is commonly called up here, the Canada
grouse (_Dendragapus canadensis_) of the scientists, is a bird that I
find very common and amazingly unafraid under the spruce and fir in
these northern woods. He is a smaller, grayer, darker bird than the
ruffed grouse which is the familiar bird of our home woods. Up here they
call the latter “birch partridge,” because he feeds on birch buds,
while the spruce partridge feeds on the tips of the spruce. The birch
partridge is more wary. As at home, he thunders up from the underbrush
and shoots himself across space and into the shelter of the farther wood
like an indignant cannonball.

The spruce partridge winds along the brakes and undergrowth just ahead
of you, or in the more open space under the dense evergreens flutters up
into the lower branches, and seems to think himself secure there. I have
stood among a flock of these beautiful creatures while they called
faintly and reassuringly to one another,--so near that I might see every
minute detail of plumage. Then, before they flew, I stepped quietly up
and touched the soft feathers of the one on the lowest branch.

Then, indeed, panic fear seemed to

[Illustration: Seems to think himself secure there]

strike the flock at one blow, and they whirred into the dense green of
some tender, motherly firs, whose arms closed about them and hid them
from all rude intrusion. These birds are smaller than the ruffed grouse,
though they are plump and beautiful creatures, and, because they feed on
the spruce tips, are said to have flesh too strongly spiced to be
palatable. I am glad of that. After the friendly way in which they
received me into their community, to shoot and eat them would be a good
deal like going out and bagging the neighborhood children on their way
to primary school.

You soon get to feel that way about the deer up here in the Macwahoc
woods. All along the lumber roads you may see their tracks, their keen
hoofs cutting pointed marks in the soft mold of the wayside. If you have
come silently and the wind is right you may swing a curve and be in
time to hear a buck stamp and blow before he sees you and flips his flag
and bounds off into the brush. Or you may see a slender doe pirouette
like a ballet-dancing wood nymph and float away, with a stiff-legged,
dappled fawn prancing after.

The creatures of the wilderness, when startled, seem to have a singular
scorn of earth. You hardly note that they spurn it from beneath them as
they depart. The coyote and jack-rabbit of the western plains do not
seem to run; they simply float over the sage-brush, to your following
vision much as a hawk does, only far swifter. So I have seen a fox sail
along, seemingly about three feet in the air all the time, over a
Massachusetts pasture. It is amazingly like flight. A startled Macwahoc
deer in the same way seems to unconsciously acquire the true principle
of the aeroplane.

In among the hackmatacks and arbor vitæ in the lower land the
golden-winged woodpeckers are gathering in numbers in preparation for
their fall migration southward. You may hear the vigorous note of the
approaching single bird as he stops for a moment on a spruce top.
“Kee-yer, kee-yer, kee-yer,” he shouts, with the accent on the yer. It
has all the loud nasal twang of the stage Yankee, and the bird is as
ludicrously awkward in his ways, sometimes.

If you step softly through the swamp you may find a group of them going
through a grotesque dance, seemingly for their own amusement. They
spread their tails stiffly, walk along limbs with mincingly awkward
gait, and bob and bow to one another, saying, meanwhile, “Wee tew, wee
tew, wee tew.” It is an amusing performance, and is apt to be
interrupted by your guffaw of laughter, at which, whirls of white, gold,
and black, with a dash of red, they fly away to repeat the performance
in some undiscovered retreat.

The flicker, which is another of the fifty-seven varieties of alias
under which the golden-winged woodpecker sometimes travels, is, I
believe, the most brainy of the woodpecker tribe. Having brains he has
also humor, and from the time he takes his first flight from the high
hole in some woodland stub till pigeon hawk or barred owl cuts short his
flickering, he is making a joke of things.

Like the flickers, the crows of northern Maine migrate southward in
winter. The deep, long-remaining snows cover their sources of food too
deep, and they find the clam flats of the coast a sure refuge and a
well-stocked larder. Just now they are waxing fat on grasshoppers,
marching in long lines across the open fields, lines from which no
careless hopper may escape, and croaking contentment as they go.

They will stay until the snows drive them, however, and even in winter
an occasional scout makes a quick flight north just to see how the land
lies. It is but a half-day’s trip up and back. I wish I might, too, be
able to reach the land of the mother firs as easily when I feel the need
of them. However, the aeroplane is in the incubator, and, unless the
Wrights go wrong, perhaps next year or the year after I shall.




BIRDS OF THE NOR’EASTER


Our weather here in eastern Massachusetts comes from the southwest.
Whirling storms, little or big, move up from the Gulf coast and pass on,
headed for Spitzbergen by way of Newfoundland. Knowing the habits of
these whirling winds, the watchers of the weather bureau are able to
say, as a rule quite accurately, when the storm will reach us, from what
direction the winds will blow, and what they will bring with them and
after them,--rain, gale, or fair weather.

One exception to this rule of accuracy is when the storm center, instead
of reasonably and politely following the usual route, skips suddenly out
to sea by way of Hatteras and goes roaring up the easterly edge of the
Gulf Stream. That is when the weather signs that you find on the
southeast corner of the front page, evening edition, fail, for that is
when we catch our unexpected northeaster.

“Back to the wind in the northern hemisphere,” says the rule, “and the
storm center is on your left.” So, with the wind whirling its
thousand-mile circuit about this mysterious center halfway across the
Atlantic, we get it from the northeast, and it brings whiffs of
mid-ocean spume to our nostrils that are weary of the summer’s heat, and
clothes all the land with the gray mists out of which grew the Norse
sagas.

On days when the northeaster sings along the Gloucester shore, tears
white wraiths off the red rocks of Marblehead and Nahant, and spins them
in beaten spume along the gray sands of Nantasket, we of the inland
country tread our heat-browned pastures with lifted heads, watching
mysterious vapors wrap the land in legend, breathing the same air as the
stormy petrel, and knowing that in our hearts the strong pulse beats
with the blood of vikings.

On such days I love to watch the pond shore and the reedy stretches of
the meadow marsh, for to them come the first of the wild migrants of
autumn, and in the northeaster you may exchange greetings with the
winter yellow-legs, just down from the Arctic shore. To-day I heard
them, high in the invisible realms of the upper mists, whirling down to
me,--gray forms out of a gray sky that seemed to loose them as it later
will loose snowflakes.

Their staccato whistle in its minor chromatics shrills forth four notes
over and over again,--notes lonesome with the heartache of northern
barrens, wild as the echoes of ice cliffs that never rang responsive to
voices other than those of the eerie birds of Arctic seas; a
high-pitched plaint that might well be the shrilling of a little lost
wind crying for its mother. You may imitate this whistle well enough to
deceive the birds and bring them swirling within range of your gun if
you will, though you can never put into it the wild plaint that echoes
of far-off, lonely spaces.

The yellow-legs do not come as often as they used, and it is some years
since I have seen even a small flock of the beautiful little blue-winged
teal that were once so plentiful that the rustle of their wings was a
familiar thing at daybreak on the marsh. I miss them both. It is worth a
tramp to pond or marsh to hobnob even for a brief moment of interchange
of friendly greetings with such travelers. The winter yellow-legs may
summer in the extreme Arctic and winter in Patagonia. The teal’s range
is less, though he may breed in Alaska and winter in South America.
Their loss, here in the east, is the price we pay for civilization of
our present sort. I daresay it is worth it, but I believe there is a
better sort that does not come so high in the loss of wilderness
friends.

Along the pond shore, after the yellow-legs have dashed in upon us,
whistled the wind full of loneliness and heartache, and dashed away
again like ghosts of gray snow-flurries yet to be, it is a pleasure to
watch the homely antics of the spotted sandpipers. Of these you may find
a pair or two about the pond all summer long, no doubt having a nest in
some grassy meadow nearby. By the time the equinoctial northeaster is
due, this pair or two has become oftentimes a dozen, preparing for their
flight to the shores of the Caribbean Sea, where they will spend the
winter, yet loth to leave New England.

These birds are never much afraid of me. If I approach too near they
sing out peevishly, “Peet-weet, peet-weet,” and half-circle in a short
level flight out over the water and back again to the shore. Indeed, I
strongly suspect their attitude toward my intrusion is one of humorous
scorn. They are apt to face me as I come quite near, and bow low with
what seems the exaggeration of politeness, only they immediately turn
about and bow just as politely the other way, which flips their white
tail feathers in my direction with a gesture which is certainly one of
ill-bred contempt.

Then they fly away, leaving me in doubt as to whether they mean it or
not. Probably, however, there is nothing distinctly personal in it. The
legs of the spotted sandpiper are hitched to the body with muscles that
seem to act like springs, and he can’t help teetering when he attempts
to stand still, hence his popular names of teeter, teeter-tail, etc.

Along with the spotted sandpipers at this time of year I am apt to find
the ring-necked or piping plover, these already on their autumnal
migration, for they breed from Labrador northward. They differ little
from the sandpiper in size, but you will readily know them by the white
collar which encircles the neck, with a little black vest partly defined
just below it. Modest, busy little chaps they are, running about on the
sands, picking up insects and minute _crustaceæ_, continually
twittering “Peep, peep,” and caring little for your approach until,
finally frightened, they rise as one bird and fly away in a compact
flock.

I have never seen these birds swim, though their half-webbed feet would
seem to indicate that they can. Though, for that matter, birds that have
no webbing at all between the toes sometimes swim well when forced to
it. The common barn-yard hen, thrown into the water, will sit erect and
swim as a duck might until her feathers are wet through.

To the pond with the autumnal northeaster usually comes a pied-billed
grebe or two. If you are sharp eyed and fortunate you may see one
beating his way down the wind with rapid strokes of his ludicrously
short wings. His flight is something like that of a duck, though I think
he makes harder work of it, more wing strokes to the minute; but you
will know him as he nears you, for no duck ever stretched his head so
eagerly forward or carried his legs dangling so far astern.

The bird should be at ease on land, for he has a bill like a hen, and
his toes are lobed merely, not connected with webbing. But he is not. On
foot he is slow, clumsy, and ludicrously ungainly. Probably for this
reason the grebe does not go near land when he can help it. Even his
nest is built on the water, sometimes actually floating, a mass of
rotten sedge and mud, and the chicks swim and dive like old birds as
soon as hatched. But if the land gait of the grebe is ludicrous and his
flight laborious, in the water he is the personification of grace, ease,
and agility.

Well does he merit one of his familiar names,--that of water-witch.
When the hunters go forth to the marsh I am sorry for my innocent
friends, the blue-winged teal. I know how few fly now where once the air
would seem full of them. When I hear the quacking of live decoys my
heart misgives me for the fate of the black duck, for I know how their
fellow-feeling and sociable instinct will bring them in to the blind
where the gunners are hidden.

Neither decoys nor dead shots give me any qualms of uneasiness where the
pied-billed grebe is concerned. The decoys may split their throats in
calling to him when they see him swim by just out of gunshot. He will
not even turn his head. It may be that he has a voice; I have never
heard him use it. When it is in the open with fair play, grebe against
gun, my sympathies are with the gunner, for I know how great cry and
little wool will result.

I have seen a pied-billed grebe cornered in a narrow, shallow river by
gunners on each bank. He dove at the flash of the first gun, and though
it was point-blank range, he was under water before the shot could reach
him. He was up again and under a dozen times, to be followed by a dozen
shots, only wasted. No wonder the hunters call him “hell-diver.” I have
seen it stated in nature books that this name is given him because of
the extreme depth to which he is supposed to go. No doubt the grebe goes
deep when he wishes to, but the gunners haven’t taken that into
consideration. The name is one symptom of the profanity which his
exceptional skill necessitates.

At the end of a dozen shots the grebe cornered in the river decided in
his slow way that he was being hunted while above water, so he simply
failed to come up. A grebe has been known to stay under five minutes
when loosening water-weeds for its nest or when pursuing fish for its
supper. This one was seen no more by the gunners, and after waiting half
an hour or so they went away, firm in the belief that the last shot had
really reached him, but that he had in his death throes become entangled
in water-weeds and remained there. Comforting for the gunners, no doubt,
and very satisfactory to the grebe. Ten minutes after they had
disappeared the bird reappeared and went on feeding as before.

He had simply been floating along, under water all but the tip of its
bill, which protruded as far as the nostrils and gave him ample
opportunity to breathe. All these are clever feats, of course, but are
explicable. The grebe has to live, either on or in the water, and he has
learned how to do it even with the hand of man against him. He has one
other trick, however, the mechanism of which I have never been able to
understand. Swimming along on the surface he will, if he cares to,
suddenly sink as if made of lead, feet first. How does he do this? One
moment he is as buoyant as a cork; the next he goes down like a
flatiron. “Spirit duck” is another name of his. He deserves it.

Another bird that is always linked, in my mind, with the sea wind
beating the long marsh grasses into panicled waves and the fine rain of
the equinoctial hanging the sheltered culms with strung pearls, is the
Carolina rail. Some of them breed hereabouts, but the greater number of
them are on their way from Labrador, where they have brought up the
season’s young, to the banks of the Orinoco or the steaming swamps that
border the Amazon.

How they ever make the flight back and forth each year is one of those
mysteries of which the wilderness world is fascinatingly full. Hardly
with threats and beating of bushes can you drive them out of the marsh
grass. When one of them does take to the wing it is with reluctance and
apology for his awkwardness oozing from every pore. If you will put some
brown feathers, a pair of dangling legs, and two short, inadequate wings
on a misshapen bottle and send it fluttering through the air over the
grass tops for a rod or two, you will have a good imitation of a
Carolina rail protesting at being kicked out of the _Poa serotina_.

Once is always enough for him. You may go to the exact spot where he
dropped into the grass again and raise all the hullabaloo you wish. Only
with a dog can you start him out again, and the third time he will not
flush even for the dog. Yet with this equipment _Porzana carolina_
leaves Labrador in the latter part of August and arrives in Venezuela
during November! Perhaps he does part of the journey on foot, for he is
certainly better equipped for walking than for flight.

The rail is the incarnation of timidity, and you may look long even when
the marsh is full of them before you see one. The best way is to slip
your canoe quietly up some narrow creek where the tall grass waves far
above your head and lie silent in it where you may scan either bank.
Trampling through the grass it seems thick almost to impenetrability,
but with your head on a level with its roots rather than the tops, you
will see that it is full of Gothic-arched aisles, sometimes widening
into under-grass cathedrals with nave and transept, sometimes narrowing
into invisibility, though there is always a secret door through which
the initiated may pass.

Down the widest of these aisles comes the runway of the muskrat. Through
the tallest of them may stalk the bittern with his long neck stretched
straight out before him, and his sharp bill pointing the way. These are
the broad highways of the marsh, but the rail does not travel them much.
Even their seclusion is too public for him. He prefers the narrowing
passages that lead him to close-pressed grass culms. These cannot bar
his way, for that peculiar wedge-shaped build which makes him so
ridiculous on the wing is just what he needs here. It allows him to
follow the point of his bill and slip through the thickest growth of
culms without a rustle and without disturbing the tops. Hence if you are
fortunate enough to see him, he is just as likely to step forth from a
solid wall of grass as from one of the pointed arches of the openings
along the way.

You will not hear the grass rustle nor see it move, but the rail will be
there, intent and preternaturally solemn. His head is thrust downward
and forward, his tail is cocked nervously high behind, and he walks
gingerly, as if apologizing to the mud for making tracks in it. You may
see him climb a rush by clutching it with his toes, and feed on the
seeds above; you may see him swim deftly across the creek, for he is a
good swimmer. But the least motion on your part will send him into the
thick grass again so quickly that he seems to dematerialize.

Old gunners tell me that a rail will slip under water and cling to a
reed with only his bill above the surface, thus imitating the grebe in
his methods of concealment. They say that when hard pushed by dogs and
guns they go entirely beneath the surface and sometimes cling there
until drowned; also that they have known rails to go into fits and
finally swoon from fright. I cannot vouch for these things myself, but I
believe that if any bird ever swooned from fright it was a Carolina
rail.

Duck, grebe, plover, and rail may come to us storm-driven by the stress
of the equinoctial. Not so the loon. He rides the northeaster, and you
may hear him whooping in wild glee as he slides down the gale. His gray
breast is brave to buffet gray crests of Arctic seas and his mighty
thighs are built to drive the broad webbing of his agile feet till he
whirls through icy waters like a spirit. Alert, defiant, mighty, he is a
familiar figure of the wild gale that has spun a thousand miles across
turbulent seas, and when he lights in our inland waters he comes not for
refuge, but because the restless joy of storm riding has happened to
bring him hither.

Shoot at him if you will. He is under, unharmed at the flash of your
gun, and he may swim a half-mile, if he cares to, before coming up
again. Then you may hear him laugh in scornful good humor, “Hoo, hoo,
hoo, hoo,” for little he cares for you. He knows enough to keep out of
your way, but you cannot feel that he is afraid of you. When he goes out
again, welting the gale with his strong wings and boring straight into
the wild heart of the northeaster, the pond is lonely, the marsh flat
and insipid, and it is time for dry clothes and the comfort of glowing
logs in the wide fireplace.




THE SQUIRREL HARVEST


The red squirrel is a good deal like me,--he never can wait for the
chestnuts to open. As long ago as early September I used to see him
going up and down the trunks of trees neighboring the chestnuts,
sputtering and exploding his way along in a jerky unrhythm. He would go
up the trunk as a light-weight, motor-skipping runabout goes up a steep
hill, trembling all over as he fizzed along with barking explosions.

He had his eye on the closed burs, densely set with green spines, and he
was angry because he was liable to get his tongue pierced in getting
them open. But it did not matter. The milk-white pulp in the brown
shells was too tempting. All this last month he has been going to the
very tips of the limbs of the highest trees, clinging there as only a
red squirrel can, and gnawing the burs loose. When a sufficient number
of these were strewn on the ground beneath he would motor down there,
and with the piston still chugging occasionally, just to prove to
himself that he could start his car at a second’s notice, cut
expeditiously through the defiant prickles and smack his wounded lips
over the kernels within.

Meanwhile, in common with most of the boys in town, I, too, have been
having my troubles with the chestnut burs. A boy understands that the
red squirrel gets the burs after the fashion of the real sport, and so
far as he can he is willing to do the same. But the smaller limbs of the
chestnut are brittle, and under the best of circumstances it is a

[Illustration: The red squirrel gets the burs after the fashion of the
real sport]

dangerous thing to go far enough out on them to reach the tips.
Light-weight, daring boys sometimes do this, and often fall in the
attempt, as accident records show. Sometimes the squirrel falls too,
though this is of comparatively rare occurrence.

The wild creatures of the wood are as liable to accident as you and I,
but they are not so prone to it. That severe pruning which wild life
gives all who are robust enough to live it lops off all the clumsy
branches of the squirrel family tree. Few but the cool-headed and
skillful live to reproduce many of their kind.

The boy who falls from the upper limbs of the chestnut may save his neck
by catching a lower limb as he falls--I have known boys to do it. Or he
may even land with no serious injury if he is fortunate enough and the
distance is not too great. The squirrel would be almost sure to land
safely either in the lower limb or on the ground. This is more sure in
the case of the red squirrel than in that of the gray, for the gray is
two or three times the weight of the red. Yet I have seen a gray
squirrel come down forty feet though the air and land uninjured.

My own method of loosing the unripe burs from their tenacious hold on
the limb tips lacks the finesse of that of the squirrel. I do my work
with a club. Nevertheless, it takes wisdom and precision. To stand
twenty feet or so below a bunch of chestnut burs and hurl your club at
them with such accuracy that it hits the limb just behind them at the
right spot to snap them off their perch is an art that you must learn in
boyhood or never.

You may hit the burs themselves or you may hit the limb farther back,
and nothing happens. With the burs on the ground your task is to open
them, which you must do by pounding with one stone upon another. Hit in
the right place and with the right force, the green, prickly envelope
yields and the soft, brown nuts roll out uncrushed. To me they are
sweetest when this brown is just beginning to tinge them, before the
shells are very hard and the kernel is too resilient and crunchy.

On these October mornings the chestnuts are ripe,--a wonderful rich
brown, still clinging in close companionship in the center of the burs,
which have opened and revealed the precious kernels within. To harvest
them now by the quart your task is more easy than it was to get a few
when they were three weeks younger. The squirrels know this. There is
no need to climb to the dangerous limb tips and cling there precariously
while gnawing them through. The ground is strewn with bounty, and the
reds and the grays both are busy among the rustling brown leaves
garnering what the winds, the boys, and I have shaken from the open burs
and failed to gather.

Now and then they eat one, but for the most part they are busy storing
them up for future use. In hollow trees, under stumps, they pile them in
little hoards. But beside that they dig little holes in the ground here
and there and put a nut at the bottom of them and pat the brown leaves
down on top. I have always inferred that these were for special
luncheons, stored ready to hand when the owner did not care to go to the
main larder. I know that they do go to these in the winter on
occasions, for I have often seen the hole through the crusted snow where
the squirrel resolutely dug his way in and left behind him the chipped
shells of the nut which he found there. But I do not believe that one
nut out of a hundred that is thus buried is ever resurrected by the
squirrels; it is nature’s method of getting her chestnut trees properly
planted, and I half believe that the squirrels realize this; that they
do not mean to dig these nuts up again, and only do so when hard pressed
by hunger.

My path to the chestnut wood to-day lay through a shallow sea of purple
wood-grass. It is a wild grass, scorned of the farmer and left
ungarnered of his scythe, standing now in clumps in all waste places of
the pasture,--an amber wine of autumn tint that intoxicates you as you
pass through. It is a stirrup cup for your expedition. Old as the hills,
amber-purple and clear, yet with a fine bubbling of hoary leaf tips, it
warms the heart as wine of the grape does, and already you begin to be
drunk with the beauty of the day. Afterward you pass through aisles of
birch wood, where the once green leaves are a translucent yellow, fining
the gold of the sunlight down to a soft radiance, a richness of pale
effulgence that I have seen matched only in one gem.

Some years ago there came from South African mines a wonderful lump of
crystallized carbon,--a great diamond that, cut and polished, yet
weighed one hundred and twenty-five carats,--the famous Tiffany yellow
diamond, in whose heart glows the same yellow radiance which wells
throughout the birch wood of a sunlit October day. The Tiffany gem is
worth its hundreds of thousands, and you might lose it from a hole in
your vest pocket. The birch wood is a half-mile wide, and once you have
felt its soft radiance flood your soul it is yours forever. Neither
deserts nor cities can take it from you.

Sitting secure in a crotch of the chestnut tree of my choice, beating
the chestnuts from the half-open burs with a birch pole and listening to
their patter on the dry leaves far beneath, I was conscious after a time
of a little gritting squeak,--a squeak that sounded much like a small,
unoiled joint that was very mad about it. It might have been two tree
limbs rubbing together, only that it was too personal. Creaking limbs
are always mournful in tone; this squeak was full of impotent, nervous
rage.

It was difficult to locate exactly, and I had thinned out the chestnuts
pretty well and was about to climb down before I discovered what it was
that made it. Hanging head down from a twig that protruded from the
under side of a large limb was a great bat, swinging from one hind toe.
His furry, gray body was half loosely wrapped in his wings, that looked
like wrinkled folds of dark sheet rubber. His ugly little face was all
screwed up with rage and his sputtering squeaks were a ludicrous
exposition of impotent fury.

Every blow of my pole on the tree had jarred him. In his darkness of our
daytime he could not see what it was that troubled him, nor could he
venture to fly away from it lest he rush into worse danger. So he simply
hung on and protested in all the voice and vocabulary that he had, and
when I plucked him carefully by that hind claw and wrapped him in a
handkerchief and stowed him in the side pocket of my coat, he continued
to mutter bat profanity.

You will find in the velvety heart of a chestnut bur usually three nuts,
sometimes but one of these plump, and with a ripened kernel within the
shell. The two others in this case will be but flat walls of shell with
no kernel. Sometimes two of the three are meaty, and occasionally all
three, only the fat ones being fertile seeds. Poking about among the
brown leaves on the ground beneath the tree for these, now and then
pricking my fingers in separating a particularly fat one from the bur,
that had come down with it, I found another unfamiliar denizen of the
chestnut tree that my clubbing had dislodged.

This was the larva of _Telia polyphemus_, the _polyphemus_ moth. The
moth himself is a beautiful creature with a six-inch spread of
pinky-brown wings with a wonderful eye-spot of peacock-blue,
dark-maroon, and yellow-white in the after wing. The form that I had
picked up was a fat worm, nearly four inches long and fully an inch in
diameter, of a clear, transparent, yellowish-green texture ornamented on
the sides by raised lines of a silvery white,--a strikingly beautiful
object so far as coloring is concerned.

The larva of the _Telia polyphemus_ is no uncommon creature among oak
and chestnut trees, although, so near is he in coloring to the leaves on
which he feeds and so high in air does he spend his life, you may live
in the woods for years without seeing one. Him I carefully stowed in
another handkerchief, tucked into another side pocket, and started for
home with my chestnuts and my menagerie. One more adventure, however,
was in store for me.

In the open pasture stands a tall hickory, clad in the golden tan of
autumn foliage, dripping gray nuts and blackened husks upon the pasture
grass beneath it. Taking his pick among these was a splendid great gray
squirrel, and as I approached, instead of bounding across the open to
the thick wood, where he would have been surely safe, he sprang to the
trunk, and hiding behind it, eyed me over the lowest limb.

There was something of roguish defiance in his look and I accepted the
challenge. I dropped my coat on the grass, that the bat and caterpillar
might be uncrushed in the mêlée and swung into the tree toward the
squirrel, who promptly scampered up the trunk fifteen feet or so, poked
his head over another limb, and undeniably winked at me.

The gray squirrel is clever, but even on his own tree his reasoning did
not go very far. I was steadily driving him to the top, where he would
be cornered, but he did not run out on a limb and drop to a lower one
and then scramble down the tree and away, as he so easily might. He went
straight on toward the top, and I after him. Hickory is tough, and even
its small limbs will hold much weight. I could go as high as the
squirrel could.

On the topmost bough he poised. I was within arm’s reach. A gray
squirrel has long, keen teeth and knows well how to use them in
self-defence, yet you may grasp one safely if you will do it right. Take
him with the full hand from behind with the thumb and finger round his
neck and meeting below his jaw. Thus you may hold him securely,
uninjured, and be free from harm yourself. I have often pulled grown
squirrels from the nest in this way.

But before my hand reached him the squirrel launched himself into the
air with a bound that carried him in his flight clear of all limbs. It
was forty feet to the drought-hardened pasture turf, and immediately I
keenly regretted my frolic. A fall from that height, I thought, could
but end in the death or injury of my friend. I looked to see him go to
his finish, but he did nothing of the kind. Instead, he spread his legs
wide, stiffened his tail, and fairly seemed to flatten himself as he
went down, scaling to the ground instead of falling inertly, and though
he struck with a considerable thud, he was up and scampering for the
wood immediately.

The squirrel had won, though I can but think it was a foolhardy trick,
and he would have done much better to slip down from tip to tip of the
hickory limbs and circumvent me by circumnavigating me.

The crimson of the sunset lighted the path home with lambent radiance
that made a twilight of the yellow glow beneath the birches and dulled
the fire of the sumacs on the upland to a red as of dying embers. The
purple wood-grass caught and held the complementaries of these fires
reflected in its shadows till I seemed to stride through ashes of roses
to the dun shadows of the lilacs in my own dooryard.

Here I bethought me of the bat, too long enshrouded in my pocket for
his comfort, perhaps, and I unknotted the handkerchief, planning to
slip him into an empty squirrel cage for a day’s observation before I
set him free. But I had forgotten that the sun was now below the horizon
and that the bat could see as well as I could. Seemingly, he could see
quicker, for before I could put fingers on him he slipped from the fold
of the handkerchief, dove into the air, and with swift, sculling wings
mounted over the tree tops and was away like the wind.

However, I had my chestnuts left, and my _Telia polyphemus_ larva. Him I
put in the butterfly cage without delay, along with some chestnut
leaves, on which he might feed. He proceeded instead to spin himself a
cocoon, rolling himself in one of the leaves in the corner of the box.
There he will sleep lightly till spring, when I hope to see him come
out a full-grown moth. I shall watch for him with much interest, for
this species is very variable, and many aberrant forms and local races
occur. There are even albinos, and melanic specimens also have been
noted with the wings almost black.




AMONG AUTUMN LEAVES


The deep woods catch all the rich colors of the autumn sunsets in their
foliage. The dull reds and the vivid ones, the maroons and the scarlets,
the golden yellows and the wondrously soft and mellow shades of tan and
brown they hold till from a hilltop you see the forest afire. Flames
flutter, embers glow and fall, and brown ashes and cinders remain.

Yet, if you walk far below the fire, in the forest aisles that are
beginning to crisp under foot with the fallen embers of this
conflagration, you are conscious of but one color sensation. A subtle
glow pervades all things,--an atmosphere that is a yellow from which
the sap has run, a very ghost of color. The domes of the hickories that
grow in the open pasture are a rich brown, a most lovable shade; those
hickory saplings that are rooted in the shade, and wait so patiently for
fate to carry off the big trees that they may take their places, take an
autumnal tint of this ghost of yellow also, and all the leaves of the
wood ferns are pale with it,--a paleness that becomes with the more
delicate an almost transparent whiteness.

We may ingeniously say that the reason that these leaves are so anæmic
is that they grew in the shade and had not in their veins the good green
blood of those that flourished in the open and absorbed from the sun and
wind of summer the burn and tan that were to show in autumn. Yet, how
can we be sure of this when those leaves which grow side by side on the
same tree vary so in their autumnal tints?

Here upon a maple I find leaves that are still green, while others just
beside them are scarlet. From the hilltop those maples which show the
fieriest flame are the ones that on close inspection show leaves where
the green and red mingle either in the same leaf or contiguous leaves.
Perhaps the green, complementary color of the red takes the part of
shadow background and throws up the more vivid color in greater
prominence.

The swamp maples are unique in their way of taking on autumnal tints,
anyway. In common with all trees that stand with their feet in the
water, they lose the rich green of full summer growth long before the
frosts touch them, and long before similar trees standing on upland
slopes have any idea that autumn is approaching. Occasionally a maple
branch growing on some swamp tree, bowered in a little cove of woodland
greenery, will flame up in early July, as if some _ignis fatuus_,
wandering in by ghostly moonlight from a near-by ditch, had touched the
bough with strange fire that crimsoned but did not consume.

There is nothing the matter with the tree; it is well nourished and of
vigorous growth, yet it flares this early signal that winter with her
train is sooner or later to whistle down the tracks of the great
northern road. Such a maple is like an over-zealous flagman who stands
on the crossing and waves his signal before the train has even started
from the distant city. I do not recall seeing this trait exhibited by
other trees.

Again, individual trees of many species will show ruddy tints in the
swamp, sometimes in early September, before other trees of the same
species, standing near by, have even a suspicion of it. Yet this rule
holds good; the swamp trees color first and lose their leaves first, the
maples first of all. Sometimes by October first precocious specimens are
bald, their gray polls conspicuous spots among the surrounding greenery.
With their vivid colors, their premature baldness, their usually smaller
size, and a generally devil-may-care air which, perhaps, is only seeming
because of these facts, the swamp maples always appear to me like
swashbucklers, roistering young blades in whom riots the wine of life,
whose red faces early in the morning of the autumn and whose premature
baldness both hint of dissipation. Their roots are deep in the richest
of mold dissolved in the water of copious springs. The most bounteous
of banquets and the warmest of wine is continually at their lips. It is
no wonder if their youth is tempted to excesses.

Most of the lady birches stand aloof on the upland slopes; I notice not
far enough away to forbid the handsome young maples from climbing out of
their mire of dissipation to nibble the dry husks of gravel-bank
breakfast food and drink dew among them if they have the courage. But
not all thus withdraw in whispering groups. Down into the swamp others
have stepped and stand, erect and dainty, among the rubicund roisterers.
Social workers these without doubt, missionaries of the Birch C. T. U.,
who thus give their lives nobly to teaching by example.

Among the same temptations they stand, their shimmering green skirts
drawn slimly about them, their slight forms erect, the very visible
essence of virtue. The fervor of autumn touches them only with a
pale-yellow aureola, which marks at once their freedom from taint of
temptation and their saintliness. There is not much to prove it in a
bird’s-eye view of the swamp this October, yet I can but feel that these
pure lives radiate an influence among the sensuous swamp maples.

Here and there you will find one of these the rich green of whose summer
leaves turns to yellow hue at this time of year, though it is a
creature-comfort yellow compared with the soft ethereality of the
birches. Such, I believe, are on the road to conversion. The
spirituality of their neighbors has touched them and they are beginning
to be conscious of the beauty of temperate living and strive toward it.

Perhaps some autumn we shall note the presence of a great revival and
the October swamp will be all one pale, misty nimbus of spirituality, a
soft yellow radiance of saints who have spurned riotous living and glow
with ethereal fires of renunciation. Then will the Birch C. T. U. hold a
praise service.

On higher ground another maple which from its autumn coloration as well
as other characteristics is a very near relative of the swamp maples is
the white maple, sometimes called the silver-leaved maple. This, too,
turns a vivid red in early October, though it holds its leaves a little
longer than the red maples of the swamp. On the other hand, the imported
Norway maples, more shapely and stately trees in their full growth than
our own, line our streets and parks with noble round heads that are
still green except for a slight frosting of bronzy yellow on top, giving
the tree a richness of dignified maturity that is beautiful to look
upon. There is nothing of the missionary about these; they simply stand
serene, placid reminders of the value of noble example.

Like these trees in the formation of symmetrical, rounded heads are the
chestnuts, which are still green when the other deciduous trees of the
wood have been caught in the conflagration of autumn coloring. Now, the
first week in October being past, they show a certain yellowness of
foliage which is enhanced by the yellow-brown of the ripe burs which
throng the tips of their upper branches.

Twice during the year does the rich green of the chestnut leafage bloom
with a richer tinting,--first in June, when the long staminate blossoms
seem to pour in cascades from their billowed tops, and again at this
time of year, when the ripened nuts push open the green burs of
September and the failing sap leaves them at first a yellow-green and
later a golden tan-brown. Walking beneath the trees to-day you are
likely to get a rap on the head from a solid seal-brown chestnut, or
even find your neck full of prickers where the fretful porcupine of a
descending bur has jabbed you.

Already the ash trees, whose foliage has passed with much rapidity
through olive-green and olive-yellow to tan-brown, which still holds a
little of the olive tint, stand bare and gray against the sky, like the
red maples, sure prophets of winter. The ash is never profuse of leaves.
It drops them first of all in the autumn and is among the latest to put
them forth in the spring. Even in the height of summer you cannot say
that its foliage is dense; and when the slender brown leaves lie upon
the ground they do not make a thick carpet. They merely crisp under foot
instead of rustling.

Under a Norway maple the ground will later be half-leg deep in dense
curled leaves that rustle and swish under your stride. You plough
through them and they leap up and dance away from your progress, a
splashing, undulating brown tide. Under oaks, much later, you find a
similar sea, though its flood does not rise so high and there is a
crisper rustle that is yet a large-hearted and generous sound. Under
willows there is a silky crispness that is quite different from either.

So, blindfolded and led from one part of the forest to another, you
might tell every tree under which you passed by the sound of its dead
leaves under foot. So, too, knowing your tree, you might tell with
accuracy the time of the year, the definite week of autumn in which your
pilgrimage was taking place. Under the oaks to-day, though but a few
leaves are yet on the ground, you would feel the round acorns under
foot, and you would know that these were not chestnuts because of the
lack of burs; so, too, you might know that you were under the white oak
instead of the black by the different shape of the acorn.

If your foot-sense were not sufficiently subtle to note this
difference--though if you were much addicted to life in the open
woodland it would be--you still might, blindfolded, know the white oak
from the black by the sweetness of its acorns. I sometimes think they
are more pleasing to the palate than the chestnuts, though they have a
slight astringency. Yet their meat is sweeter and, aside from the slight
bitterness, has more of flavor, as you will see if you will test first
one and then the other. I think you will agree with me that the chestnut
flavor is pale and insipid in comparison.

The black-oak acorn is a different fruit. Like the tree it seems to have
absorbed all the bitterness of the wood. The white oak always seems to
me to glow with the generous hospitality of the sunshine, the black oak
to be morose and vindictive, a tree of dull days and shadow. I have
little excuse for this feeling, unless it is because of their fruits.

The two trees grow side by side in the woodland, the black, if anything,
the more vigorous in growth, yet the scaly whiteness of the bark of the
one always seems hospitable, the rugose blackness of that of the other
unfriendly. So with the fruit; the rich flavor of the white oak acorns
is inviting, the meracious bitterness of the others is repellent. Out of
the fact of this palatableness on the part of the one and repulsiveness
on the part of the other has grown a singular condition in the southern
states, where the trees as here once grew in equal profusion, side by
side in the forests.

There it is the custom, and has been since the days of first settlement,
to turn swine loose in the forests, where in the autumn they fatten on
“mast,” which is an old English name still in use there, but little
known in New England. It means forest nuts of any kind, but especially
acorns. These southern, forest-feeding swine have so loved the
white-oak mast that they have in a large measure kept the trees from
reproducing by eating all the seeds. The black-oak mast, on the
contrary, they have rejected, as any wise animal would, leaving the
seeds to be scattered about in profusion and reproduce more black oaks.
Hence a scarcity of white oaks in southern forests where they would be
welcome.

The oaks are more tenacious of their leaves than any other deciduous
tree, though they are fairly early in showing autumn tints. Long after
the reds of other trees of the wood are buried in the brown drifts that
cover the roots from the too fierce frosts of winter the rich deep
crimsons and red-browns of the oak remain. Indeed, the leaves of some
species hold on all winter, and let go their grip only reluctantly when
pushed off by the swelling buds of next spring’s growth.

Their rustle, as they cling to the twigs in December, makes the wood
vocal as the winter winds sift the snow softly down among them.
Oftentimes before you see the first fine, far-apart flakes of the coming
storm you may hear them pat here and there on a resonant oak leaf, and
their presence makes the winter outlook more perfectly and comfortingly
bleak as the fine flakes whirl through them. Snow amongst perfectly bare
twigs fails of its full effect. You need the shiver of its sifting among
the dry, persistent leaves of the oaks to realize all the beauty of its
bleakness.

Now, however, the rich wine reds, the vivid crimsons, and the deep
maroons that deepen on the one leaf into bluish purples and on the other
into violet-browns mingled, as they are yet with the vigorous
chlorophyl-green of the untinted leaf, these all are beginning to make
up the more permanent glory of the full tide of autumn color. Come with
me, if you will, at sunset to the scrubby hill where three years ago the
woodchoppers swept through like locusts, devouring every green thing
that lay in their path.

They left behind them only gray stumps, dead limbs, and devastation. Yet
hardly were their backs turned before the surgent vitality of spring
swept upward from the earth-sheltered roots and burgeoned from the gray
stumps in adventitious shoots that flushed purple with the excess of
young blood in them. Four feet they grew, these new shoots, that year,
and as much more the next, and now another forest of young oaks, black,
white, red, scarlet, and scrub romps where the elder forest stood in
majesty. Its leaves are fewer in number, but of enormous size and full
of the riot of young life, with all the vigor of the parent tree sent up
from the great deep roots.

Now their tide of sap is flowing back and the deep bronze-green is
turning to the richest crimson and lake. Through these the golden
radiance of the sun is drowned in a sea of bacchanal glory that makes
the eye drunk and bewildered with its wine of crimson fires. To look
toward it directly is to face a furnace of vivid liquid flames that
makes the whole world green with flying blots of complementary color as
you look away. Looking north or south to relieve the eye, you find that
the rich color is still caught cunningly in the curves and facets of the
leaves that glow like fire-rubies set in mosaics of chrysoprase,
almandite, garnet, and carnelian. Turn again so that your back is to the
sun and your eye rests among soft depths of umber lighted by rich reds
that do not dazzle and flanked by tans and beryl. It is a world of glow
and warmth and color that will long outlast the scarlets and yellows of
the other deciduous trees, and even in the dead of winter the sunset
fires will glow and flare in remembrances of these colors in the
still-clinging leaves.




THE DAY THAT SUMMER CAME BACK


The summer came back to-day, trailing gossamer garments over the pasture
and adding the romance of August to the glamour of the mid-October
woods. Where luminous purples hung deep in the shadows of the distance
it painted them with a soft gray-blue bloom like that upon the grape.
The undulating hills were as soft with it as if they were waves of the
sub-tropic reaches of the Gulf Stream, where a wonderful film of purple
efflorescence shimmers as far as eye may see.

The tan of hickories and the tawny yellow of chestnuts seem to break
through this haze as the floating gulf weed does off Turk’s Island or
among the Bahamas, and when birds lift from the tree tops and sail away,
it is as if a school of flying fishes were darting across your steamer’s
prow. The softly-breathing southern air is welling up from this
mid-ocean river of mysterious romance and floating films of dreams all
along our too clear-cut hills.

To-morrow the wind will be in the northwest again, the morning sun will
glint on fields that are hoar with frost, and in the afternoon the Blue
Hills will be blue no more, but brown with the rustling tannin of dead
scrub oak leaves seen too clearly,--gray with granite angles, and
sharply cut against a sky from which all dreams have fled. We had
thought the summer too long and too hot, we welcomed the crispness and
vigor of autumn, but to-day we walked abroad with joy in the warmth
that again thrills us as with a fine touch of youth come back, and as
little crinkles of heat shimmer upward from the brown fields we push
forward, eager to bathe in it all once more.

All the out-door world seems dreamy with the same delight. The blue jays
flutter back and forth on softer wing, and their usual strident clangor
is subdued to an almost caressing babble, in which you think you hear
the tones of spring love-making. They know the feel of nesting weather,
and though it is but for a day it soothes them to happy response. This
morning a robin, sure that spring had come again, sat up on the elm tree
outside my window and greeted it with full-throated song, just as he had
in June, and all day long there has been twittering of birds in the
pasture and the forest.

Only a few of our host of summer visitor song birds remain, and the
great wave of southward migration has passed us, yet to-day the pasture
was vocal with the twittering of late passing warblers, and some even
sang, _sotto voce_, to a sand-dance accompaniment of rustling leaves.
The myrtle warblers were busy among the blue-gray, waxy, aromatic
berries of the bayberry, which is their favorite food. The crop is good
this year, portions of the pasture being almost blue with the close-set
berries, and I think the myrtle warblers will linger long with us.
Indeed, they have been reported as staying all winter when the bayberry
supply is ample and sheltered from the worst of the north winds.

If they do the robins will stay with them, for the crop of cedar
berries is a good one also. Almost all the red cedars have some, and
some are so thick-set with them that their bronze-green, now yellowing a
little with the lessening sap, is all lightened up with an alluring
blue. I do not blame the robins for lingering long with the cedar
berries. I like them myself. They are a little dry, but very pleasantly
sweet; and after the sweetness is gone there lingers on the palate a
spicy aromatic flavor which is most enticing.

Some of our Norfolk County swamps are so thickly set with swamp white
cedars that it is almost impossible for a man to push his way through
their young growth. That north wind that can cut its way to the heart of
these must be keen indeed, and here, when the berries are plentiful, you
may find not only robins, but now and then a bluebird, and more
frequently partridge woodpeckers, all winter long.

We had a killing frost only a night or two ago, the thermometer in
sheltered positions marking twenty-five to twenty-eight degrees. It
withered the grape leaves and took all tender things of the gardens and
fields. Such a temperature for a long autumn night one would think would
be death to those frail creatures of summer,--the butterflies. Yet
to-day I saw a monarch soaring on strong red wings about the top of a
great pine tree, sixty feet in air, seemingly seeking food among the
resinous tips.

Across the fields a sulphur flitted his dainty way like a yellow fleck
of animated sunshine. A few grizzled goldenrod and frost-bitten asters
still bloom feebly for him, but in the swamp, undismayed, the
witch-hazel twists its soft, yellow petal-fingers and sends out dainty
perfume for his delectation. Over at the clubhouse a hunter’s butterfly
and two well-preserved specimens of the painted lady sunned themselves
in warm spots on the shingles.

In spite of the summerlike quality of the day these seemed anxious. Now
and then they fluttered eagerly about the building trying window
fastenings and poking their heads into cracks, seemingly trying
desperately to get in. They tried on the shady sides of the building as
well as on the sunny, and though I cannot prove that it was not mere
aimless wandering, it seemed to me to be done with a definite design. I
think the painted ladies were hunting shelter in expectation that the
day was a weather breeder. I think they knew that more cold weather was
sure to follow, and though they had found shelter in which they were
able to weather the first cold snap, they feared lest the next be too
much for them, and hoped to get inside in some crevice next to a stove
funnel.

Some butterflies, notably the _Antiopa vanessa_, which appears sometimes
on warm days in February, winter successfully. Probably the _vanessa_ is
particularly resistant to cold. Probably also he has a peculiar faculty
for finding shelter and safety, and I think the two hardy examples of
_Pyrameis cardui_ showed signs of some of the same instinct.

Later, in the full heat of the afternoon, when the thermometer stood at
eighty degrees, I stood by the side of a long, straight country road
leading north and south. One monarch butterfly after another was soaring
along this road, seemingly not in haste, but making, nevertheless, a
speed of six or seven miles an hour. And every one of them was heading
due south on the trail of the one ahead, as if in a game of
follow-your-leader. Was the leader a wise old butterfly who had made the
long southern road before, and were these others monarchs of this year’s
growth following him that they might reach the goal in safety?

Someone wiser than I may answer this, but if he does I shall ask him how
he knows.

The _Anosia plexippus_, which is another name for the monarch, has
fluttered about this road all summer long, never going outside his usual
round from one flower clump to another. The cold snap of three days
before may have wakened primal instincts in him and sent him on his
southern migration, just as these may have set the _Pyrameis_ to
fluttering about the clubhouse, where there might be sheltered spots in
which to try to pass the winter in safety. Or the compelling force may
have been something entirely different. Who can ever know?

All along the borders of the swamp the witch-hazel is working out its
peculiar and mysterious destiny. It is not this belated summer day,
however, that has brought out its fragrant yellow blossoms. They
unfolded just as cheerfully in the killing frost of three nights ago.
Witch-hazel nuts are ripe now, the witch-faced husks splitting open and
showing the glossy black kernels within, about as big as an apple seed,
shaped like the enticing black eyes of the witch herself.

All among these nuts grow the scrawny blooms, sending out a delicate
fragrance which is as soft and fragile as that of early spring
flowers,--a refined and pleasing scent that brings a thought of
far-away apple blossoms. Yet on this sunny day you may not catch this
odor unless you put your face close to the flowers, for the vigor of the
sun draws up the smell of tannin from all the dry leaves underfoot till
the whole world seems a tea factory. Should the rustle of these leaves
in the light autumn breeze be the silken swish of trailing Oriental
garments, and slant-eyed people appear under pyramid hats and begin to
gather them and pack them in chests marked with strange pencilings like
those on the end of a red-winged blackbird’s egg, I for one would not be
surprised.

The blackbird himself is an Oriental mystic in disguise, and he marks
the names of his children in Chinese characters round the big end of
each egg. The next time you look into a blackbird’s nest you notice if
this is not so.

If you wish the odor of the witch-hazel blooms you must go to the swamp
a morning after a showery night. Then the odor of the dead leaves will
have been all washed out of the air, and the faint, fine fragrance of
the latest flowers of the season flits daintily out to greet you as you
fare down the path.

Yet, though flowers are rare on the third week in October and the
pungency of dead leaves pervades the swamp, the upland pastures have a
fine fragrance of their own,--a perfume so dainty and alluring that you
look for its source in bewilderment, knowing that at this time of year
no flowering shrub, no slender-blossoming vine, remains to float it down
the wind.

It is not the pitchy aroma of the white pines. These have just carpeted
all the floors of their house anew with last year’s leaves. The new
ones are not pitchy, and that resinous smell which the midsummer sun
distills is hardly to be noticed in the wood. Nor are the pasture cedars
to be thanked. Their prim, close-wrapping branches give forth a woodsy
smell when bruised. It is not a perfume, and it comes only with turmoil.
The soft southern wind bears no particle of it to your wistful senses.
The hemlocks stand, beautiful but darkly morose, on the north side of
the hill, and give forth no scent.

I searched the pasture long before I found it. Coming out from under the
white pines into an open glade on the more barren soil, where the pitch
pines begin to climb the slope, it always seemed stronger than anywhere
else. It was as if rose-crowned Cytherea and all her attendant nymphs
had just passed from perfumed baths and gone upward through the wood.
If the soft moss had shown the heel marks of dainty sandals I should not
have looked further. It was as possible that the garments of passing
nymphs should have shed sweet odors on the glade as that these should
float serenely there when all the flowers were dead. I paused among the
pitch pines to consider the matter, and one of them thrust its branch
tip directly into my face.

Then I thought I knew. The same fragrance emanated from the pitch-pine
branch, stronger, indeed, somewhat more resinous, I thought, but
practically the same. Six clubs crown the tip of every pitch-pine
branch, one standing erect like a plume in the center, five arranged
about its base at equal distances, not unlike a five-pointed star. These
are the new shoots for next year, in rudimentary form to be sure, but
all modeled carefully on what is to be.

There is the vigorous stem and the leaves as green as they will ever be
again, indeed I think greener. The whole thing, which will be a perfect
shoot a foot long, is compacted into a solid club less than an inch in
length. Enclosing this is a fibrous husk which wraps it from all cold.
Howsoever bitter the weather the life warmth of the young shoots is most
carefully protected by this wrapping. But there is more than this. An
air-tight, waterproof coating of hardened pitch is outside of the whole,
completing an exceedingly neat, tasteful, and effective seal.

The pitch-pine mother trees have completed their preserving and now sit
back and radiate perfume in satisfaction and kindly good will toward the
whole world, for this slightly resinous sweetness does not come at all
from the pitch-covered buds on the branch tips as I first thought. It
seems to emanate from the whole tree. Cut a branch and take it home with
you. Strip leaves and buds from it if you will; then smell the wood. It
is there. But more than from anywhere else it seems to come from the
mature leaves,--those which have borne the burden and the heat of the
summer, and now are losing their rich green in a ripening which befits
maturity and work well done.

All the evergreens take on this slight tendency to a mellow yellow as
the autumn waxes. It is due, no doubt, to the lessening of the sap in
the leaves. All winter they will hold it, and when the joy of spring
sends his lifeblood bounding back again, it will fade and leave them
vigorously green once more.

Crossing the glade again on my homeward way I plucked branches of
juniper so thickly studded with blue berries that there seemed scarcely
room for the scaly-pointed leaves, and in so doing I stumbled upon the
real secret of the dainty odor left by the goddess and her train. For
the matured shoots and leaves of the juniper give off a fragrance that
is as much more dainty than that of the pitch pine as that is more
dainty than the strongly resinous odor of the white pine when cut or
bruised.

Cytherea must have smiled upon the humbler juniper as she passed, and
the dwarfed and stunted shrub must have caught the warmth of her eyes
full in the heart, for it sits snug as the days shorten and radiates a
happiness that is perfume, and sends the thought of the goddess to all
who pass that way. The stronger odor of the pitch pine carries it far
on the soft south wind across the glade and down the path through the
pasture, but this is only the vehicle. The dainty essence of perfume
which stops you as if a soft hand fell upon your arm floats from the
loving heart of the rough and lowly juniper.

The sun of this day on which summer came back set in a pale sky that
flushed with a tint of rose leaves, burning long before it died to
ashes,--the cool, gray ashes of autumn twilight. Against this the
slender tracery of birch twigs stood outlined delicately. Some leaves
still cling to the birches, and these were silhouetted against the
pale-rose glow in a soft haze that made a shadowy presentment of
springtime all along the western sky. The year in its second childhood
thus slips happily away from us in dreams of its youth. Through the
August midday of the pitch-pine grove we pass to the home path among the
birches, and though October dusk slips its cool hand into ours, it is
only to lead us toward a western horizon where springtime seems still to
wait for us wistfully.




WHEN AUTUMN PASSES


Last night the superstitious leaves, forced to part from the home branch
and begin a journey on Friday, knocked on wood as they went by, hoping
thus to make a change in their luck, for the omens were all bad. The
gibbous moon was peering over the eastern wood and they saw it over
their left shoulders. Hence in their fall they turned round three times,
still for luck!

They suspected also that they were being sent off in batches of thirteen
and shivered lonesomely all the way to earth, where they scrambled
together in groups and held their breaths, listening. Now and then one
of them saw a ghost, and rustled the fact to the others, who took up
the dreadful story with little spatting sounds of terror till all rose
like a flock of frightened birds and shuddered into scrambling heaps
behind tree trunks and in fence angles. They made the night eerie with
their outcry. As fresh platoons came down the wood-knocking had the
effect of xylophone solos, the dead march in Saul played by goblins in
the lonesome trees that tossed their bare arms to the sky in mute grief.

All the out-door people seemed sorrowing, and more than half a prey to
superstitious forebodings, for the passing of the hunter’s moon marks
the passing of autumn. November, it is true, is rated as an autumn month
in the almanac, but I have no doubt that The Old Farmer knew better. He
had to divide the year into four equal segments, and he did it very
well. If November must be classed with either autumn or winter it
belongs rather with autumn. But it simply ought to be classed with
neither.

November is a month by itself, just as March is, and neither has more
than the most casual connection with the season that has gone before.
The year might better be divided into two seasons,--the one of growth,
the other of rest, with November and March sort of dead centers, as they
say in mechanics, interstellar space as they say in astronomy--voids
between the two.

These wood-knocking leaves are the last from the elms. The native maples
and ash trees were bare long ago, and though some of the still birches
hold their yellow nimbus, many others are bare already. Only the oaks
stand up to be counted with their rich crowns of red transmitting the
sunlight till those at the right angle between you and the sun flash
like fire rubies.

Yet, when I say this it is true only of the native trees of the forest.
None of the foreigners hereabout seem to ripen up in glory or, indeed,
to understand what a winter is before them and duly prepare for it. The
purple lilacs of my garden hedge show a green that may be a little
grimmer than it was in midsummer, but there is no hint of a ripening
color in them nor have they lost a leaf. Their pith is trained to
continental winters still, and though they have faced a half-century of
New England cold, they still have the habit of the Persian uplands,
which are their birthplace.

The white lilacs haven’t even that dark green, but are a gentle
shade,--almost like that of early springtime, when the leaves are hardly
as yet half grown. The apple and pear trees have lost some leaves and
others are browned by the frosts we have had, but none of those
remaining show autumn coloring as we know it. They are simply darkened
and grizzled. The Norway maples are showing a bronzy-yellow now, but
holding their leaves bravely still, as if in the memory that, though the
winter night of their homeland is long and dark, its shores are bathed
by the Gulf Stream and the cold is late in coming. I think none of the
imported trees and shrubs of Europe show the gorgeous coloring of our
native ones, though they may have been here long enough to have been
trained to it by the climate, if that is the cause of it.

Englishmen know nothing of the glory of autumn foliage until they come
to America and see it. Then they are duly impressed, though you cannot
always make them acknowledge it. Search English literature if you will,
through prose and verse, and you will find no reference to any gorgeous
reds and yellows of autumn. They don’t have them. Thomson in his
“Seasons” speaks, referring to autumn, of

      “ ... a crowded umbrage, dusk and dun,
    Of every hue from wan, declining green to sooty dark.”

It is a pity Wordsworth could not have been born in Cumberland County,
Maine, instead of Cumberland County, England, and have tramped the hills
of, say, West Mansfield, instead of Westmoreland, that our rich autumn
ripening might have fruited in his verse. I wonder that the English do
not plant our maples and our red oaks in their parks. It would be an
interesting experiment to watch for fifty years or a hundred and see
whether the trees changed to the English habit and lost their gorgeous
hues, and whether, if they retained them, some English poet did not rise
to the occasion and make them immortal in splendid verse.

Perhaps it would all be a failure. Our American men and women,
transplanted, so soon lose their native characteristics and ripen,
over-ripen in fact, into English men and women that there lurks with us
an underlying fear that the trees might suffer from the insidious blight
also. Perhaps it has been tried with the trees; it would be interesting
to know.

I think the leaves were afraid to go home to earth in the dark last
night, because it is rarely the custom of leaves to part from the tree
in the night time. On still nights you may camp beneath a maple whose
leaves have long glowed red and seemingly been ready to fall, and not
hear a single spirit-rapping of falling leaf against limb. The frost
may be white upon them in the morning, but not until the rising sun
touches them will they loose their hold and fall to the waiting earth.
Then with the kindly light upon them you may hear, if you listen
intently, the little chirp of contentment with which they let go and
flutter quietly down to their winter’s rest. On a still frosty morning
when the sun has first touched the trees these faint clucks make an
infinitesimal chorus that is as sprightly as the morning light.

The xylophone ghost-march of last night was a far different thing. It
came with little puffs of south wind after a bright, still day,--puffs
that died out as soon as they had done the work, and left the night
white and still under the gibbous moon. On all the leaves that had not
scurried into shelter a white frost fell that filled them with
ice-needles until they were crisp, and then sprouted miniature
ghost-ferns all along their stems and upper sides.

Thus they lay stark until the white of the night gloomed into the gray
of a daybreak fog that seemed to scatter all life in a formless void.
After leaves have once been thoroughly frozen they dance about in the
breeze no more. The forming and melting of ice crystals breaks up their
cells and leaves them sodden and no longer elastic. They sag and sink
and the chemic forces of the earth soon begin to work on them and
resolve them into salts and humus that will go the rounds and form and
nourish new leaves for another year.

You may see the ghost of autumn go up, these last mornings of October,
in this dense white fog that often lingers late into the day. Last
night was breathless with frost, after the leaves had done their ghost
dancing, until the wan moon had begun to cushion down in the velvety
blackness of the west and the gray of false dawn had stopped the winking
of low-hung eastern stars.

The world was blank with silence. Until now, no matter how dark the
night or how still, you had but to listen outdoors to hear the pulse of
nature beat rhythmically, to hear the blood surging and singing through
all her arteries. In that last hour before dawn the pulse had ceased and
the blood stood stagnant. Then some outside presence held the mirror of
the universe down close to the lips of the earth to see if she breathed.
At first it was unclouded.

Then little wraiths of white mist shuddered up from meadowy hollows and
others danced in bog tangle as will-o’-the-wisps might have done two
months ago. These quivered together in soft gray masses that shut out
the meadows and swamps, absorbing them and numbing them into a white
nothingness. It was neither a rising tide nor a growth, but a sort of
absorption. From my hilltop, in spite of the gathering darkness that
seemed to be crowded together by advancing day, I could see the world
gradually slipping back through chaos into the white glimmering
nothingness of the nebular hypothesis.

On such mornings, even after the white light of dawn has filtered
through this gray darkness and made its opaqueness visible, the world
stays chloroformed. The keen frost chill which has endured until the
coming of the fog is merged in the dense damp cold of this which goes
deep. The frost chill just touches the surface and does not penetrate.
It numbs your fingers or tingles your ears maybe, but it gives the blood
a fillip that makes it dance merrily, and you are warm though it is
cold. The fog chill works in your marrow and you are cold inside first.

I think the birds know the night before when one of these marrow-numbing
fogs that wrap all the ghosts of autumn in their folds are coming on,
for they seem to seek closer shelter than usual in the heart of the
evergreens, and even when the cold, gray light of dawn filters through
the opaqueness they still resolutely hold their heads under their wings.
There is no song on a morning like this, no cheery chirping even. They
all know that they will get bronchitis if they try it.

The red squirrels are a little hoarse already; they have been caught by
a little one earlier in the season and they have no mind to add to it.
So they stay snug. They have made their winter nests now, often in the
close, crinkly limbs of a large birch, often in a good-sized cedar that
stands well among other trees, that they may have easy access to the
squirrel highway. Some of them are in hollow trees and others still have
taken a crow’s nest for their foundation and have built a dome over it.

Wherever it is placed the material and architecture is the same,--a
soft, silky lining of the finest shreds of the loose-hanging outer bark
of the red cedar, wound round and round with coarser fiber of the same
material, the whole making a round ball as big as a derby hat, or
bigger, the walls being several inches thick. Entrance to this is by a
round hole, just big enough for the slender animal to squeeze in from a
convenient limb. The elasticity of the cedar fiber practically closes
this hole after the squirrel has passed, and the family may cuddle
together there snug through the coldest snap.

On a bright frosty morning you may hear the shrill pæan of the red
squirrel ringing through the wood as soon as he can see. Then he is out
and alert. On mornings like this when the chill fog hangs dense I never
hear him, and I am quite sure he sticks close to his family, cuddled up
in comfort in the middle of that warm nest.

The morning light breaks through such a vast cold cloud with difficulty,
indeed we may not truthfully say that the morning breaks. Rather, it
oozes, coming so slowly that without a watch in the pocket you would
not know the lateness of the hour. By-and-by, if you watch the east
carefully, you will be surprised to see how high the pale image of a
morning sun is riding.

On such a morning few leaves fall. The chill dampness seems to revive
their waning energies and they apply them to clinging just where they
are. Perhaps the chill reminds them dimly that they still are protectors
of next year’s leaf buds that nestle close under most leafstalks and may
be injured if the leaf is torn away too soon. These are well wrapped in
tiny fur overcoats or resinous wrappers, to be sure, but I think, as the
leaves seem to, that if anything could penetrate these clever coverings
it would be one of these morning fogs which mark the passing of
October.

But, though to us who stand at the bottom of the fog that ghostly image
of a morning sun looks pale and impotent, its work is really vigorous
and aggressive. Looking down on it from a sufficiently high hill we may
see it shredding the upper surface into breakfast food and eating its
way so rapidly downward that the rolling billows of mist ebb before its
rays like a Bay of Fundy tide.

Long before mid-forenoon it has finished its repast. From below the fog
seems to gradually grow warmer and to be dissolved in its own moisture.
The frost that crisped underfoot before the mists began to shiver
together in the lowlands now glistens as dew under the yellow sun. The
day warms toward the noon and we note with satisfaction what a perfect
one it is. But not till the little winds of afternoon begin to bustle in
among the trees do the leaves again begin to fall. The moisture is
again dried out of their petioles and the xylophone solo tattoos once
more the elfin tune to which they march on.

But now they do not go shuddering and in superstitious terror. Instead,
there is a lilt to the music and they dance their way down. Some jig it
alone. Others waltz cosily; but by far the larger number like best the
sociable square dance and foot it in groups to the merry-go-round of the
Portland Fancy. It is in such mood that we like best to say good-by to
them.




NOVEMBER WOODS


November is Nature’s stock-taking month, when she suspends her labors,
stands aloof from her work, and counts up the dozens, noting them all on
her list before she carefully puts them into the winter storehouse. To
the very last of October her factory is still running, though on part
time. By the first of December she has put things away.

November is the month in which she counts up the gain or loss and is
happy or disconsolate, according to the tally. Why else these wonderful
clear days on which you may see without a spyglass clear to the other
end of your universe? On some of these days Nature smiles in delight
over her success, and we say, this is the real Indian summer. She is
pleased with the perfection and profuseness of the product. On others
you will see her eyes cloud with tears, and sometimes a perfect passion
of northeast tempest blots the landscape and drowns the world in a flood
of rain. In this case she has discovered that the workers in some
special department have been lazy or hampered by some unfortunate
condition and their output is a failure.

There are years when the nuts do not mature and the squirrels must
migrate or starve. On others the drought so dries the upland grasses
that those of next year may not sprout as usual from the roots but must
be propagated by seed, which of itself is scarce also because of the
dryness. Or excessive rains so flood the lowlands that a thousand swamp
and meadow products rot and write the word failure large over a whole
department.

For Nature’s successes are by no means easily won. She lays such plans
for a hickory tree that if all the blossoms which open in May were to
produce fruit the trees’ tough limbs would be torn from their sockets
with the weight of it long before maturity. Some years, because of storm
or frost, the tree’s crop is a total failure, but the resourceful
mother, the moment she notes the death of the embryos, sets the wood to
making a more vigorous growth than would have been possible in a
fruiting season. Then, though she may weep in November over the loss of
nuts, she will be able to smile through her tears at the thought that
next year the tree will have far more ripe twigs for the bearing of
nuts. Or the tree may produce a thousand nuts and the squirrels be too
busy to plant more than a dozen of them. What is true of the hickory
tree is true of all other creatures of the vegetable and animal world.
Death stalks close upon the heels of birth, and a million fragile lives
pass out unnoticed to one that greets our eyes in maturity. No wonder
some years November is a month of wailing and Nature lets the storms of
December blot the tally sheet with the white forgiveness of the snow
before the almanac will agree that the month is half over.

The boundaries of the real month are thus not half so firmly set as that
which the calendar proclaims. October may on the one end and December on
the other so overlap it, some years, that Nature has hardly time for her
bookkeeping. This year I think November came a day or two earlier than
the calendar figures it, for the last days of the calendar month of
October went out with a perfect paroxysm of weeping.

Nature, even before she fairly got her tablets out for the tally, had a
terrible pet about something. I think her grief must be because of the
carelessness of man during the summer’s and autumn’s unprecedented
drought whereby he has killed with his fires so much of the woodland
growth. For other than this it seems to me that the year’s work has been
very successful. Never were wild fruits more plentiful. Only on the
driest of the upland pastures was there failure. There the fruit set in
more than the usual quantity, but in some cases shrivelled before coming
to maturity.

There was a tremendous crop of chestnuts this year, with enough hickory
and hazel nuts to make the squirrels smile and work overtime in laying
them up for the winter. From the June berries which purpled the shad
bush to the wild apples that still hang on the woodland trees, gleaming
pale-yellow among the rugged tracery of bare branches, production has
been plentiful and picking peaceful. Hardly a rainy night, never a rough
storm, did we have from the first of May until the end of September. All
those trees whose fruiting depends upon windborne pollen which can only
float in dry weather had perfect conditions for fertilization. So with
those plants, whether shrub or tree or annual or perennial herbs, that
depend on insects for the same service. There was no time lost on
account of rain.

As it was in the vegetable world, so it has been with animal life, and
particularly with those birds which nest on the ground. The mother bird
may conceal her nest so carefully that neither skunk nor fox nor
predatory boys can find it. She cannot conceal it from the
rapidly-rising water of a June flood which will drown her nestlings or
so chill her eggs that they will fail to hatch. A long heavy rain at
just about hatching time may almost wipe out the young birds of a season
among certain varieties. I read recently a report from Maine stating
that the partridges are particularly plentiful in that State this year.
This, the report went on to say, was because the hedgehog bounty of some
years ago had made a scarcity of hedgehogs. Therefore, as the hedgehogs
no longer ate the partridge eggs, partridges were increasing in number.

The State of Maine porcupine, commonly called hedgehog, though purists
decry the custom, will eat the handle off your canoe paddle, the floor
off your camp, or the boots off your feet. I dare say he eats partridge
eggs when in his short-sighted, clumsy wanderings he happens to find
them, but I doubt if he does enough of this to make him responsible for
a shortage in the partridge crop. I believe the partridges are
particularly plentiful Down East this year because there was never a
cloud in the sky nor a drenching rain from the time the eggs were laid
until the young birds were fully fledged. I know that is what happened
here in Massachusetts and, as a consequence, the young of ground-nesting
birds have had more than their usual opportunity to grow up.

This is true of partridges, and the application is apt, for the
partridge is not a migrating bird, nor even a wanderer. He clings to
the particular section of woodland where he was brought up with a
faithfulness which is apt to prevent his reaching a green old age. You
may drive him from his covert with all the racket you are able to make.
He may leave with vigor and directness that would seem to prove that he
has through tickets for Seattle. Yet, if you sit quietly by in a
position which commands a good view of the approaches, you will before
long see the flip of a brown wing that is bearing him back again. He has
gone no farther than the dense shelter of a neighboring pine grove,
whence he watches out until he thinks it safe to come home.

I take it that the same reason holds good for the plentifulness of
woodcock this fall in certain swamps which I frequent. You may know that
woodcock are plentiful in a place, even if you do not see them, by the
numbers of little round holes in moist, soft ground, usually where the
swamp begins to give way to sandy upland. Here the bird goes jabbing for
angleworms, which are his chief diet. I have never been able to catch
them at it, though I have often noticed the borings in the spot whence I
have just flushed the bird. In fact, I have never seen a live woodcock
on the ground anyway.

The bird is so built that I and other predatory creatures will not be
able to do it. His coloring is well adapted to blend with the
dusky-browns and black of the low ground which he frequents. He does not
have to look for his food. He feels for it. Given the proper piece of
ground to contain angleworms, he has but to probe with that long,
sensitive bill and haul them out when the sense of touch tells him that
one is there. For

[Illustration: He does not have to look for his food]

this purpose the end of the upper mandible is somewhat flexible and
moves so as to nip the worm when he feels it.

If we could see him thus engaged I think we would understand clearly why
a woodcock is so peculiarly built. His eyes are set so far back in his
head that the bird has a grotesque appearance. But in this very fact
lies a large factor of his safety. Wild animals that hunt woodcock may
not slip up on them unseen while they are feeding. The woodcock’s nose
may be in the mud, but his eyes, set absurdly far back on his head, are
then just right for seeing all that is going on. Let there be but the
slightest hint of danger near by and the bird goes straight up in the
air in a tremendous burst of speed.

Woodcock hunters claim that this speed is so great that the bird is
invisible till he reaches a height of four or five feet. I am inclined
to believe them for I have never yet seen a flushed bird till he got
shoulder high, though he may have come up right in front of my nose. So
vigorous are the strokes of his wings during this flight that the stiff
wing feathers make a shrill whistling which is peculiar to the bird.
Rapidity of flight seems to be in the main exhausted by this effort,
however, for after they get fairly launched they seem to go rather
slowly and clumsily. In the case of the woodcock, as in that of the
partridge, the rainless spring and early summer seem to have given the
birds a chance to bring their full complement of young through to
maturity.

So, looking over the result of harvest and round-up in pasture and
woodland, I can see no reason why Nature should shed many tears or go
into any tantrums over the results of her busy season. These seem to me
to be above the average, and I look forward to a bright and sunny
November, during which she will count up the finished product with all
good cheer.

The tally of young brought to successful maturity is all that the animal
world has to show for the success of its department during the season of
growth. But nuts and fruit and ripe seeds are only part of the work of
the trees and shrubs. All the time that they are busy producing that two
feet or less of woody growth, all the time the growing and ripening of
seeds is going on, there is a further and very important labor to be
attended to. That is the production of next year’s buds. This is no
haphazard matter, nor is it left until the other things are out of the
way, but is carefully begun and patiently carried on through the
summer, early autumn seeing everything complete.

The falling of leaves and ripe fruit shows these hopes for future
foliage and flower revealed for the first time. Stand on a knoll in the
pasture and look over the tops of shrubs and trees on these keen and
clear November days and you will see that the most beautiful colors of
the year are there waiting your eye after you thought that all color had
flamed to its climax and died in the dead ashes of autumn memories.
Grays that are incredibly soft and coot in the vigorous young limbs of
the maples warm into tender reds on the twig tips where the next year’s
buds sit snug.

All this year’s shoots of the swamp blueberry bushes are a restful
green, but at the tips these, too, ripen into red, while on the higher
ground the black huckleberries and the birches show the same color till
the landscape rolls away from you in a warm and cuddley glow that takes
the nip out of the wind. Looking on these you know that the pasture
cannot be cold, however deep the snows to come or however low the
mercury in the thermometer may fall. As the winter comes on this blanket
of warm red, spread all over the bare trees and shrubs, will deepen in
hue and with the first promise of spring flush into a lively pink that
melts again into slender green with the passing of frost from the roots
and the first soft rains of April. Herein is the better half of the
harvest of the year,--a harvest not of fruition but of promise. The
out-door world ripens hope in the same crop that has given us
fulfilment.

How full of hope, of promises, of matured plans and energy these rosy
buds are you may not know till you step down among them and test their
virility and perfection. Here is the azalia, its pinky twigs tipped with
swollen, soft green buds as big as your little finger tip. Till the
leaves fell nobody thought the azalia had been doing anything since its
rich-scented white flowers fell last July. Here is the proof of its
labors and foresight. In the hearts of these buds are next July’s
blossoms, in miniature it is true, but perfect in every appointment.

About them are the green young leaves, vividly colored already, both
only waiting for the mysterious thrill of spring sap to push forward to
maturity, promising the leaves softly green, the blossoms vividly white,
sticky with sweetness, and adorably fragrant. If you will pull one of
the larger of the azalia buds apart you may easily see all this, and as
you do it, be haunted by the ghost of a perfume, an infinitesimally
faint promise of the rich odor yet to be.

So, in large or small, it is with all the shrubs and trees. Each is
loaded and primed and waits but the touch of the match in the crescent
warmth of the spring sun. Then will come the yearly explosion. It is
hard to say which of these next-year promises shows most vigor, yet I
think on the whole I would give the prize to the sapling pines. Each
central shoot of these will go up in the season from fifteen to thirty
inches, and send out four or five laterals. Yet each young tree has from
eight to a dozen brown buds prepared for this, at least two centrals
which you will recognize as being larger and standing more erect. One of
these will get the start and continue the main trunk of the tree. The
other will fall back and be a lateral branch. Yet if, as often happens,
the central shoot is disabled the next strongest will take its place and
so on, if need be, till the last of the dozen buds has stepped into the
place of the lost leader.

Sometimes, though rarely with the white pine, more often with the fir
and spruce, two will compete with equal success for this lost leadership
and you have a tree with twin tops. Usually, however, one fails in the
race and the stronger goes ahead alone.

So, going abroad these keen November days, looking upon the world
stripped of the glamour of summer and the glory of autumn fruitage, we
see it by no means a dead and pulseless thing to be wept over and
buried. Instead, we wonder at and delight in the riot of life laid bare
by the passing of leaf and fruit. The woodland is more beautiful, the
pasture more enticing than ever. Beauty thus unadorned is adorned the
most, and we forget to sorrow over the ceasing of this year’s growth in
our joy in the promise of that for the year to be.




WINTER BIRDS’-NESTING


Last night the world was all soft with mist. Over on the brow of
Cemetery Hill you looked off into an illimitable distance of it. Horizon
after horizon loomed over the shoulder of its fellows as the gray-draped
hills rose one beyond the other and tiptoed softly away into the yonder
world,--so softly that you could not tell where the earth ended and the
heavens began.

The landscape passed like an elder saint from this world to the next,
you could scarce tell when, only that you were awed and soothed with the
soft serenity of the going. In the hush that followed the soft blue
mists changed their draperies for black, in mourning for the passing of
the twilight saint, and thus night came.

Last summer night on this hilltop was filled with voices. A million
insects chirped and sang. Tree toads trilled, amorous toads played
bagpipes all along the margin of the swamp below, and in deeper water a
thousand frogs shouted one to another in guttural diapason. A little
screech owl used to sit in the darker corner of the pines and ululate
all to himself far into the night, and here and there a songbird,
stirring in his sleep, would pipe a mellow note. A coon would whinny or
a fox would yap, and there were many other sounds whose source you might
not surely define. The forefathers who wait serenely beneath their slate
headstones all along the brow of the hill had much and pleasant company
when the year was in its prime. Now their nights are as silent as if
the world itself were dead, their company ghosts of mist as tenuous as
their own.

The morning after such a night does not break from above; it grows. It
rises out of the earth like a soft tide, as if the mists that went to
sleep in it last night were the first of all creatures up, making all
things gray again. These tiptoe up, tangling their soft garments in the
trees and roof tops till they slip from them and pass on into the upper
spaces, where their unclothed spirits become the morning light. The
garments, clinging still to all things, remain behind as hoar frost.

That is the way it was this morning. All the trees had white baby leaves
of infinite daintiness and ghosts of blossoms that were not real enough
for a promise. I might better call them remembrance, touched with hope.
Hardly was the touch of hope there at the earliest light. It was just
white and delicate remembrance. Then, with the thought of the sun, only
the thought for the sun himself was not to come for long, there came a
slender opalescence welling through these white garments, an iridescent
presence that you felt rather than saw, till I knew without looking to
the east that the dawn had grown out of the earth into the high heavens
and the miracle was complete.

Out of this miracle of the birth of morning light came two pleasant
things. One was the red sun, peeping robustly in among the pines, adding
his glow to the warmth of their shelter; the other was a bustle of merry
company heralded by a salvo of elfin trumpets. A company of chickadees
came breakfasting, and with them were nuthatches. I think no one has
ever see the trumpet which the nuthatch blows, but its tiny, tin toot
is a familiar sound in the pine woods at this time of year.

If some fay of the fairy orchestra, returning in haste from revels which
lasted till the gray of the morning, did not drop it, I cannot tell
where the nuthatch did pick it up. Its note is certainly more elfin than
bird-like and always seems to add a tiny touch of romantic mystery to
the day.

Such a November morning is fine for birds’-nesting. You may go hunting
birds’ nests in June if you wish to, but you will not find very many,
half so many in a day as I can find now almost in a glance. Down stream
there is a little island crowded with alder and elder, milkweed and
joe-pye weed, and garlanded with virgin’s bower, where I called many
days last summer to watch the insect life that rioted about it. A bed
of milkweed bloom was each day a busy and cosmopolitan community.

Right at my elbow as I stood in July watching this was a blackbird’s
nest. I must have brushed it more than once, but I never saw it until
to-day. To be sure, when I first went there the young blackbirds were
grown up and gone, for the nesting season with these birds is short, and
by July the young are flying about with the flock, learning to sing
“tchk, tchk, conkaree.” Had there been young or eggs in the nest the
distress of the parent birds would have warned me of its presence.
Lacking that, so cleverly was it placed for safety and concealment, I
never noticed it till the passing of the leaves left it bare.

Ten feet away was another, a replica of the first. Among blackbirds
good form in house-building has but one accepted style. The nest is
rather deep, loosely woven of rough grass, lined with finer grasses.
Standing on the little island to-day I could not help seeing these two
nests which before I had passed a score of times without seeing, for if
June is the time of year to hunt for birds’ nests, this is the time of
year to find them.

The birds can give you, and I really think they are right about it, many
reasons why you should not hunt for their nests in June. Looking at a
nestful of young birds, with the mother fluttering solicitously about, I
always feel as I think I should if I went into a town where I was not
acquainted and went about peeping in at the nursery windows of peoples’
houses. My motives might be the best in the world. I might be making a
study of nestlings and nests of the human family for scientific
purposes; in fact, I might be a veritable “friendly visitor,” but I
should be fortunate if I did not fall under suspicion, become the object
of dislike, and eventually land in the police court.

The mere too frequent inspection of the nests and eggs of some birds
will cause abandonment, and those parents who stand by do so with such
evident distress that after the briefest possible satisfactory
inspection we ought to apologize for the intrusion and step away. Many
birds will even attempt to hasten this departure by pretty vigorous
means.

None of these objections obtains now. There are no birds in this year’s
nests, and you may gather them or tear them to pieces in analytical mood
without doing harm, at least to the birds. Down stream, ten feet from my
second blackbird’s nest, was a catbird’s. The catbird builds a better
nest than the blackbird, at least so far as strength is concerned.
Before the winter is over the grasses of the latter’s structure will be
broken and blown away by the wind or washed back to earth by rain and
snow.

The catbird’s will surely stand until next fall, and remnants of it may
be sometimes seen in the bush the year after that. For the catbird’s
material is of more rugged quality. His foundation is often of pliant
twigs or tough bark of the wild grapevine, though the nest I have before
me as I write--the one which I could not see last summer when I passed
it at the foot of the little island--has strong, coarse grasses loosely
interwoven for its foundation. Then, within this loose, rough cup is a
layer of tough oak leaves, the dry ones of the year before,
wind-proofing the bottom of the structure. Then comes a layer of fine
black roots, I think those of alder, taken where the stream had washed
them bare. Then more oak leaves, and finally an inner lining of finer
black roots from the same source as those already used.

The whole is firm, sanitary, wind-proof, but not air-proof, and
sufficiently cup-shaped to hold the young securely, though not so deep
as that of the blackbird. One kick would smash a blackbird’s nest to a
handful of straw. You might kick a catbird’s all about the meadow, and I
am quite sure the inner structure would remain interwoven.

I think the reason for the difference in the two is this. Though both
often build over water and in similar situations, the blackbird has but
one brood a season, and even a frail nest will do for this. The

[Illustration: A field mouse had appropriated this nest for an autumn
storehouse]

catbird hardly has his first brood off the nest before preparations are
in hand for a second; and the nest which can stand two broods of riotous
youngsters in succession, even if fixed up a bit, must needs be of
fairly firm texture.

The strength of the catbird’s nest often serves another purpose, though
I doubt if this is taken into the calculations when it is planned and
built. I found one of the half-dozen which line the brook conspicuously,
now that they may be seen at all, half full of wild cherry stones.
Evidently a field mouse had appropriated this nest for an autumn
storehouse, perhaps planning, before the weather got too cold, to roof
it over with a dome of soft grasses, this work of the field mouse being
not so very different from that of the red squirrel, only on a smaller
scale.

Farther down stream in a rough portion of the pasture, brambly but
beautiful with barberries, is the chosen habitat of the yellow warblers
of my neighborhood. Always they build in the barberry bushes here, nor
have I ever found them anywhere else or in other bushes. It is not
difficult to find them when the pasture is in the full leafage of late
May, for you have but to go from one barberry bush to another till you
have succeeded. But the yellow warbler is a shy bird, and I have known
them to desert nest and eggs when these were too often visited.

It is much better to hunt them now, when you have but to stand on a
little hillock and count, then pluck the nest that you prefer and take
it home with you without abraiding anybody’s feelings. The yellow
warbler mother bird seems to have a great love for the tender buff wool
of the young shoots of the cinnamon fern, which are just about ready to
shed these delicate overcoats when nesting begins with the yellow
warblers. In fact, her color scheme is perfect.

The nest, when finished, is a symphony of pale buff and silvery grays
that shade imperceptibly toward the buff touches on the under parts of
the warbler and are lighted as with a gleam of sunlight by the bright
yellow of the remaining plumage. Yet this bright yellow has a greenish
tint that is deepened in the tender green of the young shoots of the
barberry, while the yellow itself is again reproduced in the blossoms.
No wonder this lovely little singing-bird loves a barberry bush for its
nest. It finds protection and an artistically satisfying color scheme in
the same bush.

The silvery grays of the nest are the fine, silky, fibrous inner bark of
the milkweed, whose last year’s stems are shredded by wind and storm in
time for the nest-building. These barberry-bush-building yellow warblers
with whom I have been more or less acquainted for a quarter of a century
seem to care for little else for material, though sometimes they make
the fern fuzz more adhesive with caterpillars’ silk and line with a few
horsehairs and soft feathers.

Yet though these nests have been invariable in material they have varied
otherwise. Some have been so firmly woven and the material so stoutly
packed as to defy the storms of a winter or two. Others have been so
frail as hardly to be found when the leaves are off. Perhaps these
slight nests are made by birds that were nestlings of the previous year
and have not yet learned the complete art of nest-building.

Once I found one whose makers were skilled indeed. Instead of placing it
firmly in a crotch and building up with the fern wool within a netting
of fiber wound from twig to twig, as is the usual method, these had
launched boldly into a new architecture. Perhaps they had neighbored the
year before with a vireo. Anyway, they took the vireo’s plans and built
a yellow warbler’s nest on them, hanging it from a nearly horizontal
barberry fork, and finishing a fine, firm, pensile nest, vireo style,
out of yellow warbler material. I never found this nest’s successor, and
I am not sure whether, having found they could do it, they abandoned the
type for the old home style, or whether something happened to the birds,
and thus the warbler world lost budding genius.

Only one other nest have I found that seemed to be in any way abnormal,
and this, unlike the pensile nest, seems to have had a very definite
reason for its abnormality. The hollow part which had contained the eggs
and young was in no wise different from that of all other warblers’
nests. It was the depth and firmness of the foundation which surprised
me. This was built up to the height of an ordinary yellow warbler’s nest
before the real nest began at all, and (the young had flown) I promptly
took it home and dissected it.

Then the murder was out. The extra height had been added to the
structure to circumvent the villainy of a cowbird. The cowbird lays her
eggs in nests of birds that are smaller than herself and there leaves
them to be hatched. She is partial to yellow warblers’ nests because the
eggs that belong there are much like hers in coloring, though smaller,
and the fraud is less likely to be detected. When hatched the young
cowbird is so much larger and stronger that it starves out the other
nestlings or crowds them out. The nest-builders in the main are foolish
enough to bring up this murderous changeling; hence cowbirds are
perpetuated. Perhaps these warblers had had one experience.

Anyway, finding the cowbird’s egg in their nest, they had promptly
roofed it over with fern wool and fiber, built up the sides to
correspond to the addition, and gone on with their housekeeping. Here
was evidence of prompt action in an emergency in nest-building. I do not
think it possible for the birds to have lifted the cowbird’s egg over
the side of their nest and to have dropped it on the ground, which would
have been the quickest way of getting rid of it. A yellow warbler’s
nest “tumbles home” a bit at the top, as does the hull of a yacht, and I
do not think their slender claws could grasp the egg and get it over
that lip. Instead, they had done what they could,--imprisoned the
intruder egg where it could not hatch.

I found it there, addled and nearly dried up within, and I rejoiced. The
cowbird is a light-o’-love and abandons children on other people’s
doorsteps. All such should be put in a pie. Since English sparrows
became so plentiful the cowbird has shown a decided partiality for their
nests for its abandoned offspring. I found a cowbird’s egg with those of
an English sparrow that nested in a crevice right over my front door
last spring. If cowbirds must behave in this nefarious manner it is not
so bad to find them choosing the English sparrows for their dupes. The
surprising part of it is to find the cowbird with sufficient courage to
come in under the porch.

I’d like to watch a young cowbird growing up in a nestful of young
English sparrows. The tender nestlings of the yellow warbler have no
show, but I have an idea that here Greek would meet Greek, and after the
tug-of-war the cowbird would be among those not present. Perhaps in the
falling out both would fall out, at which most of us who love birds
would not grumble.




SOME CROWS I HAVE KNOWN


Already the robins that piped such a deafening morning chorus all about
us last June are swirling in great flocks about the Florida everglades,
getting up a Christmas spirit by filling their crops with holly berries
and practicing spring songs, and perhaps a little spring love-making in
the waxy shadows of the mistletoe bough.

But not all of them. Yesterday, at sunset, I heard one that had not
joined the innumerable throng. Instead, he lingers to take his Christmas
dinner in New England, his holly the red-berried alder, his mistletoe
black instead of white, with the crowded fruit of the buckthorn. Like
his mates, a thousand miles away, he, too, sang a faint little winter
song that was like an echo of his summer jubilate, a triumphant,
light-hearted tune indeed, but not heartily sung. Twilight gloomed the
deep pine growth where we were, and though the fires of a November
sunset burned red and angry in the sky, they warmed the grove only to
the eye, while the keen north wind that had blowzed the sky with clouds
all day seemed to be seeking shelter there with us. He, too, whistled in
such keen sibillation that the faint oak-leaf rustle from the hillside
sounded like chattering teeth.

The robin’s faint song may have been one of contentment with his lot, or
one of evening praise for as many mercies as he had received, but it
sounded far more, in that light and that biting air, like the boy who
whistles at night on the long and lonesome road to keep his courage up.
Then the song died away in his throat, for across the angry crimson of
the west flitted silhouetted black wings, and a pair of crows lighted
among the thick boughs of the higher pines to roost for the night.

The robin muttered “tut, tut!” somewhat hysterically and slipped away to
safer shelter deep among the low boughs and denser shadow of a tree on
the edge of the open pasture. No doubt he recognized hereditary enemies
of his race, and though he was tough enough to dare a northern winter,
was unwilling to take chances with the strong black bills of these
reckless freebooters of the wilderness. And he was right. Crows rarely
eat grown robins, for they cannot catch them, but the tender,
half-fledged nestlings are the mainstay of many a crow saturnalia.

Only too well do I remember an orgy of this sort. It was late May and
the scent of the apple blossoms filled all the orchard with delight,
just as the robins, morning and evening, filled it with song. They sang
for every cloud that crossed the sky and piped up now and then in the
full sunshine. How they found time for it all it is hard to tell, for
every nest was full of young birds that eat almost their weight in
hearty food each day.

One day the tunes changed. Coming into the farthest corner from a
woodland trip I heard from some ancient, neglected trees, such as the
robins always love and in which were grouped three or four nests, wild
shrieks of anger and dismay from a whole chorus of robins. Coming nearer
I could hear crow voices in guttural undertones, croaking ghoulishly.

[Illustration: Across the angry crimson of the west flitted silhouetted
black wings]

The crow has a language, not exactly of words but of inflections and
intonations, which express the primal emotions pretty clearly. I always
think I know what he means, though undoubtedly his crow hearers
understand the finer shades of inflection better than I do.

There is the shout of warning which says plainly, “Look out, there is
trouble right ahead of you!” A similar shout, but with different
inflection, says, “Come on. Come on. I’ll show you something worth
seeing.” There is the yell of derision and defiance with which a flock
drives an owl through the forest; there is the gentle cooing croak with
which mated birds do their love-making. There is the cry of terror and
the suppliant call for food from the full-grown young. There is also a
peculiarly devilish croak of satisfaction which they make only when
feasting on the tender nestlings of pasture birds.

This I knew, and I rushed to the rescue of my young robins, but I was
much too late. The feast was well along toward its conclusion and the
nests were nearly empty. The parent birds, reënforced by others of the
neighborhood, were doing their best. They plunged and darted at the
marauders, plucked and clawed at them, but not one whit could they stir
them, nor did they leave at my approach, and it took vigorous and
well-directed volleys of stones from a near-by heap to drive them away.
Then they went heavily, as if gorged to such repletion that they could
hardly fly.

I went on home sick at heart, and vowing shot-gun vengeance on all crows
thereafter; and it was not until I had carved the chicken for dinner
that I realized that there might be extenuating circumstances. For,
after all, the crows had as much right to robin for their dinner as I
had to chicken for mine.

Crows certainly are responsible for a large amount of infant mortality
among young birds in the nesting season, however, and to my mind it is
the greatest crime of which these black robbers stand guilty. It is for
this reason that the crow is so well hated by smaller birds, and I don’t
doubt it is this consciousness of guilt that makes him hang his head and
flee away before the attack of the least of them. Blackbird and kingbird
alike will send him flapping in shamed haste for the big wood, and it
makes no difference whether or not he has attempted to burglarize their
homes or slaughter their children.

Just as a known pickpocket is railroaded out of town by the police,
whether guilty of present misdemeanor or not, so the kingbird sends
flying any crow that crosses his path during the nesting season. You
will hear the strident, half-hissing scream of rage on the part of the
kingbird, see him launch himself from the air above and strike the back
of the flapping crow with a thump that perhaps makes the feathers fly.
The crow never attempts to strike back. He merely hangs his head and
scuttles the faster for the tall timber where is release from this
torment. I’ve never known the kingbird or any other indignant small bird
to do the crow material harm; but he certainly sends him flying.

One August, traversing a lonely swamp, I heard a great commotion among
crows over in its duskiest, farthest corner. Slipping quietly up, I
found a number of them swooping about another, which sat on a low limb
within a few feet of the ground. This crow was making beseeching cries,
like those of a greedy youngster which still hoped to be fed, and I
thought this was the case at first, for, though by August all young
crows have long been full grown, the old birds continue to keep
oversight of them. I had no sooner come within sight than the keen birds
saw me, and away they all went except the supposed youngster, who still
kept his perch and his silence, nor did he attempt to move as I
approached and finally picked him off his perch.

For he was no youngster, this crow, but was blind, old, and emaciated. I
think from the appearance of his eyes that he had been blind for a
considerable time, and the interesting question arises as to how he had
lived thus far. Surely he could not have found food for himself thus
for any long period of time, so perhaps the other crows had fed him
right along.

How old crows grow to be I do not know, but whatever extreme age they
attain this one was it. I took him home and gave him the freedom of the
yard, which he accepted. I fed him, and he seemed to be glad to have a
foster parent and to have no fear. But his presence was fiercely
resented by another family, and that was the kingbirds that had nested
in a neighbor’s apple tree. The young were grown up long ago. In fact,
the kingbirds had not been seen about for some time, but the crow had no
sooner appeared than they came darting into the yard and savagely
attacked him.

Again and again I had to rescue him from their fury, though he was the
meekest crow I have ever seen, and they no longer had young to defend.
Kingbirds go to bed at early dusk as a rule, but even after dark and
long after I had put my foundling under shelter for the night, this pair
could be heard swearing away to themselves up in the top of their apple
tree, waiting for one more whack at him. Kingbirds leave us for the
south about the first of September. I am quite sure this pair delayed
their migration for some days that year, hating to give up their daily
harrying of my ancient and toothless old crone of a crow.

He died, of old age no doubt, before the winter, seeming to fade gently
away, as a patriarch should. When, about the fifth of May the next year,
the kingbirds came back, they were noticed looking our back yard over
very minutely several different times. They remembered the crow and
were prepared to drive him over into the next country before they began
their nesting.

The patriarch was so old he could not see when I found him. Box and Cox
were so young when I lifted them from their nest that they had never
seen. They had scarcely kicked their blue-green, brown-splashed
eggshells overboard when I climbed to their great, strongly-built home
in the upper limbs of a good-sized pine. It had a foundation of stout
sticks topped with smaller ones, and within these a well-woven cup of
slender twigs lined with grapevine bark and the soft fiber of the red
cedar.

There were five young, hideous, negroid creatures with dark warts where
eyes would be, and mouths that gaped portentously. Had I realized when I
got them the amount of bird food those gaping mouths would engulf, and
then opening, clamor for more, I would have left them to their parents.
These had slipped silently away when I approached the nest, nor were
they visible at all during the kidnapping. I take it that this desertion
is prompted by wisdom, not cowardice or heartlessness, for crows are
devoted parents and look after their young long after they have left the
nest and after a period at which the devotion of other bird parents has
ceased.

There was no choice among the five; all were equally ugly, and I took
two at random and shinned down the tree with them in a bandanna
handkerchief swung from my teeth. Seeing their young thus carried away
in the teeth of a marauder, I dare say the old crows thought of me as I
thought of their fellows that ate the young robins. But though I don’t
doubt they saw from safe retreat all that went on, they took great care
neither to be seen nor heard.

The two young birds accepted the featherless biped in _loco parentis_
without any question. They also accepted all I would put into their
yawning maws, and opened them mutely for more. By and by they found
eyesight, and later voices. Then, not seeing food coming, they would
call for it with yearning and yell for it with ebullient eagerness when
they saw it, or me, or any other approaching biped. I don’t think the
neighbors took kindly to this pair of pets of mine. It was too much like
having a piano and an opera candidate in the next flat.

Sometimes their own weight a day went into these howling dervishes, in
the form of fish, frogs, grasshoppers, meat, scraps from the table, any
thing, indeed, that luck put in my way or that the ingenuity of
desperation suggested, and still nightfall found them ravenously
emulating Oliver Twist. But they grew, and grew so much alike that which
was Box or which was Cox neither I nor anybody else could tell.

As their feathers sprouted so did their ambitions. In a little while
they could stand on the edge of their nest, which I had built for them
in the low limbs of a tree near the back door, and flap their impotent
wings at the same time that they yelled for the waiter. Though I was
their guardian angel it was not for me in particular that their clamor
rent the sky, but any one who by any remote possibility might feed them.

Their first venture off the nest showed this. The new minister went
through the yard, thus making a short cut to a neighborly call. By
chance Box and Cox had been stuffed to repletion some minutes before and
were silent, half asleep in fact. But when the new minister’s hat passed
within two feet of their nest they rose to the occasion, and with one
mutual crow-language yell of “Bread, for the Lord’s sake give us bread!”
they landed on his hat. The family rescued him, of course, with humble
apologies, and he was good enough not to take offence. He came later to
call, generously, also I think somewhat stealthily, and by way of the
front door.

Box and Cox had found their wings and they used them to hunt down all
possible purveyors of food. They knew me best because I fed them
oftenest, but otherwise showed neither partiality nor affection. They
kept away from the carpenters at work in the near-by shop because they
had many times narrowly missed decapitation with hatchets, but they kept
just beyond hatchet stroke only and clamored tantalizingly. The
carpenters thought they taunted them and used to threaten gun play.

In return the crows stole bright nails, screws, and such small tools as
they could get hold of. They got away with my pearl-handled pocketknife
on the same principle, and though we often hunted for their hoard we
never found it. Their doings were often amusing to the bystander, but
more often vexatious and sometimes outrageous. I have still a vivid
mental picture of good old Grandfather Totter on his way home by the
path in the field, and stalled, because he could no longer use his cane
to hobble with, but had to have it to fight off Box and Cox.

Bird neighbors did not love Box and Cox any better than did human
neighbors, and their presence kept kingbirds and robins, bluebirds and
sparrows all in a state of great nervous tension, though I am bound to
say that I never knew the crows to disturb their nests or young. In
fact, as long as I had them, Box and Cox showed no signs of learning to
forage for themselves in any way. They depended absolutely on mankind
for food, and if man was not kind they went hungry. I think that if I
had conscientiously tried to wean them they would have shown ability to
take care of themselves, but I never had the courage to try. I did not
think the neighborhood would stand the racket.

One day they simply disappeared and I never knew what became of them.
Perhaps they suddenly heard and answered the call of the wild. The
neighbors had been wild more than once.

Box and Cox were a disappointment. They showed little of either wit or
wisdom. They had a small amount of roguishness and a mighty appetite.
Such traits as they showed were those of youth; those they lacked might
have come with age. Perhaps parent crows teach their young the wisdom
which wood-bred birds certainly show. Box and Cox had none of it, or if
they had they hid it with the pocketknife and the carpenter’s tools.

On the other hand, the strongest trait of the wood-bred crow is his
distrust of man. Instinct, if it works in the crow tribe, should
certainly have implanted this distrust in the youthful heads of Box and
Cox, but they showed nothing of the sort. And there you have the crow
puzzle all over again, for the crow, wild or tame, is a puzzle. Half a
hundred of them the other day were congregated about a wood road through
the pines, yelling themselves hoarse in the wildest of excitement.

So interested were they that they took no notice of me when I
approached, thinking that they had a hawk or owl at bay there and were
harrying him. So I walked down the wood road right in amongst them. But
there was neither hawk nor owl nor anything else there to account for
their excitement. They tore about this empty space, cawing, fluttering,
standing erect, alert, and quivering on a limb and gazing wildly at what
seemed to be to them very real and very terrible. But it was nothing to
me; I could not find so much as a chipmunk stirring there. After a
little they chased this terrible nothing on down the road and then
across lots into another part of the wood, leaving me gaping and in
doubt whether they were just playing a game among themselves, all making
believe they saw a monster where there was none, or whether they really
could see some woodland bogle that was invisible to my dull eyes and
were following him on his way.

Box and Cox may have been among them, and for all I know may later have
told the crowd what a queer creature man is when you come to know him as
foster-fathered crows have to.




INDEX


A

Acorns, 98, 99, 100

Admiral, red, 5

Alder, 177, 182

---- red-berried, 195

Angleworms, 160

Anosia plexippus, 117

Antiopa vanessa, 116

Apple blossoms, 119, 198

---- tree, 27, 135, 205

---- wild, 156

Arbor vitæ, 39

Aroostook war, 24

Ash tree, 96, 133

Aster, 114

Azalia, 166


B

Barberry, 184, 185

Bat, 76, 79, 82

Bayberry, 111

Bee, 10

Beech, 29

Birch, 29, 34, 35, 74, 75, 83, 92, 93, 126, 127, 133, 143, 165

---- C. T. U., 92, 94

Bittern, 60

Blackberry, 16

Blackbird, red-winged, 119, 178, 180, 182, 201

Blueberry, swamp, 164

Bluebird, 113, 212

Blue Hills, 110

Buck, 38

Buckthorn, 195

Butterfly, 5, 114, 117

---- admiral, red, 5

---- Anosia plexippus, 117

---- Antiopa vanessa, 116

---- Hunters’, 115

---- monarch, 114, 116, 117

---- painted lady, 5, 115

---- Pyrameis, 117

---- Pyrameis atalanta, 5

---- Pyrameis cardui, 5, 116

---- sulphur, 114


C

Catbird, 181, 182, 183

Cedar, 143

---- berries, 113

---- pasture, 121

---- red, 113, 206

---- white, swamp, 113

Cemetery Hill, 173

Cherries, 16

Chestnut, 67, 68, 69, 71, 75, 76, 79, 83, 95, 96, 98, 99, 109, 155

---- bur, 77

---- leaves, 83

---- tree, 76, 77

Chickadee, 3, 4, 173

Chipmunk, 214

Christmas, 195

---- tree, 35

Clam, 41

Clintonia borealis, 15, 16, 17

Clover, 6

Cocoanut, 19

Coon, 174

Cowbird, 188, 189, 190, 191

Coyote, 38

Crow, 40, 197, 198, 199, 201, 202, 203, 204, 205, 207, 211, 212, 213, 214, 215

---- nest, 143

Crustaceæ, 51

Currant, 17

---- fairy, 18

Cyprepedium acaule, 35


D

Deer, 27, 37, 38

Dendragapus canadensis, 35

Doe, 38

Duck, 52, 53, 62

---- black, 54

---- “spirit,” 57

---- teal, blue-winged, 48, 49


E

Elder, 177

Elm, 133

Epilobium angustifolium, 11

Erechthites, 11

---- hieracifolium, 9


F

Fawn, 38

Fern, cinnamon, 184

---- wood, 88

Fir, 23, 29, 32, 33, 34, 35, 37

Fireweed, 10, 11, 12

Fish, flying, 110

Flicker, 40

Fox, 38, 157, 174

Frog, 174, 208


G

Glow-worm, 20

Goldenrod, 114

Goliaths, 28

Grape, 74, 114

Grapevine, wild, 187, 206

Grass, purple wood, 73, 82

Greece, 27

Grebe, pied-billed, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 62

Greek, 191

Grouse, Canada, 3

---- ruffed, 35, 37

Gulliver, 28


H

Hackmatack, 39

Hawk, 38, 214

Hazel nuts, 155

Hedgehog, 157

“Hell-diver,” 55

Hemlock, 121

Hickory, 79, 80, 82, 88, 109, 153, 154, 155

Hob, 8

Holly berries, 195

Huckleberry, black, 164

Hunters’ butterfly, 115


I

Ignis fatuus, 90

Indian, 30

---- summer, 152


J

Jay, blue, 111

Joepye weed, 177

June berries, 156

Juniper, 125, 126


K

Katahdin, 23

Kimball, George, 33

Kingbird, 201, 202, 204, 205, 212


L

Lady’s slipper, 15, 16

Leprachauns, 13

Lilac, 82

---- purple, 134

---- white, 134

Liliputians, 28

Locusts, 103

Loon, 62


M

Macwahoc-Kingman road, 29

Maple, 34, 89, 91, 133, 136, 137

---- red, 94, 96

---- Norway, 94, 97, 135

---- silver-leaved, 94

---- swamp, 89, 90, 93, 94

---- white, 94

“Mast,” 100, 101

Milkweed, 177, 178, 186

Mistletoe, 195

Mitchella, 17

Monarch, 114, 116, 117

Mouse, field, 183


N

Norse Sagas, 46

Nuthatch, 176, 177


O

Oak, 97, 98, 101, 102, 103, 133, 181, 182

---- black, 98, 99, 101, 103

---- black, “mast,” 101

---- red, 103

---- scarlet, 103

---- scrub, 103, 110

---- white, 98, 99, 100, 101, 103

Oak, white, “mast,” 101

Oliver Twist, 209

Orchid, 15

Owl, 214

---- barred, 40

---- screech, 174


P

Painted lady, 5, 115

Palm, 19

Partridge, 14, 157, 158, 162

---- berries, 14, 16, 17

---- birch, 35, 36

---- spruce, 35, 36

Patten Road, 23, 24, 27

Pear tree, 35

Petrel, 47

Pine, 15, 32, 114, 174, 197, 206, 214

---- pitch, 5, 121, 122, 123, 125, 126, 127

---- pumpkin, 29

---- white, 120, 125

“Piney Home,” 33

Plover, 62

---- piping, 51

---- ring-necked, 51

---- yellow-leg, 47, 48, 49

Poa serotina, 58

Pokeberry, 13

Pokeweed, 12

Porcupine, 27, 157

Porzana carolina, 59

Proteus, 9

Pyrameis, 117

---- atalanta, 5

---- cardui, 5, 116


Q

Queen Mab, 17

R

Rabbit, jack, 38

Rail, Carolina, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62

Raspberry, 16

Rivers, Mattawamkeag, 29

---- Moluncus, 29, 30, 33

---- Macwahoc, 29, 33

---- Orinoco, 58

---- Amazon, 58

Robin, 111, 112, 113, 195, 196, 197, 198, 200, 201, 212


S

Sandpiper, spotted, 49, 51

Sage-brush, 38

“Seasons,” by Thomson, 136

Shadbush, 156

Skunk, 157

Smilacina bifolia, 17

South African mines, 74

Sparrows, 212

---- English, 190, 191

Spruce, 32, 34, 35, 36, 37, 39

---- cat, 29, 33

---- black, 33

---- timber, 33

---- white, 33

Squirrel, 69, 70, 72, 73, 144, 152, 154, 155

---- gray, 70, 72, 79, 80, 81, 82

---- red, 67, 68, 70, 72, 143, 144, 183

Sulphur butterfly, 114

Sumac, 82


T

Teal, blue-winged, 48, 49, 54

Telia polyphemus, 78, 83

Thoreau, 26

Toad, tree, 174

Totter, Grandfather, 211

Trillium, 19, 20

Triton, 9


V

Vikings, 47

Vireo, 187

Virgin’s bower, 177


W

Warbler, 112, 188, 189

---- myrtle, 112

---- yellow, 184, 185, 186, 187, 190, 191

Willow, 97

---- herb, 11

Witch hazel, 114, 118

---- blooms, 120

---- nuts, 118

Woodchuck, 6, 7, 8

Woodcock, 159, 160, 161, 162

Wood mice, 18

Woodpecker, golden-winged, 39, 40

---- partridge, 114

Wordsworth, 9, 136

Wrights, 41

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WOOD WANDERINGS ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
